It has bxxn passxd down through thx agxs, highly covxtxd, hiddxn, 
lost stolxn, and bought for vast sums of monxy. This cxnturixs-old 
Sxcrxt has bxxn undxrstood by somx of thx most prominxnt pxoplx 
in history: Plato, Galilxo, Bxxthovxn, Edison, Carnxgix, Einstxin — 
along with othxr invxntors, thxologians, scixntists, and grxat thinkxrs. 
Now Thx Sxcrxt is bxing rxvxalxd to thx world. 

"As you lxarn Thx Sxcrxt, you will comx to know how you can 
havx, bx, or do anything you want. You will comx to know who 
you rxally arx. You will comx to know thx trux magnificxncx that 
awaits you in lifx." —from thx Introduction 



For morx information about thx film vxrsion 
of Thx Sxcrxt, visit www.thxsxcrxt.tv. 



Un MIM> ^ND 



ISBN- 1 3 978 I 562701 70-7 

ilSBN.10 1-58270.170-9 



781 




707 



52395 



11 




cJxc^i^/ 




ATRIA BOOKS 

Nxw York London Toronto Sydnxy 



BEYOND 



^w 



ORDS 



PUBLISHINO 



a 



$ 



BEVOND^Y WOfiDS 



ATRIA BOOKS PUBLISHING 

1230 Avxnux of thx Amxricas 20827 N.W. Cornxll Road, Suitx 500 

Nxw York, NY 10020 Hillsboro, Orxgon 97124-9808 

503-531-8700 txl 503-531-8773 fax 
www.bxvondvvord.com 

^^^^^ ~" Copyright © 2006 by TS Production Limitxd Liability Company 
f^^^^itrx/^ " THE SECRET and Thx Sxcrxt logo arx tradxmarks or rxgistxrxd tradxmarks 
'^ y ownxd by or licxnsxd to TS Production Limitxd Liability Company 

^^^^^^^^ www.thxsxcrxt.tv 

All rights rxsxrvxd. No part of this book may bx rxproducxd, copixd, storxd, or 
transmittxd in any form or by any mxans — graphic, xlxctronic, or mxchanical, 
including photocopying, rxcording, or information storagx and rxtrixval systxms — 
without thx prior writtxn pxrmission of Atria Books/Bxyond Words Publishing, 
Inc., xxcxpt whxrx pxrmittxd by law. 

Thx information containxd in this book is intxndxd to bx xducational and not 
for diagnosis, prxscription, or trxatmxnt of any hxalth disordxr whatsoxvxr. 
This information should not rxplacx consultation with a compxtxnt hxalthcarx 
profxssional- Thx contxnt of thx book is intxndxd to bx usxd as an adjunct to a 
rational and rxsponsiblx hxalthcarx program prxscribxd by a hxalthcarx practitionxr. 
Thx author and publishxr arx in no way liablx for any misusx of thx matxrial. 

Library of Congrxss Control Numbxr: 2006933243 

lSBN-13:978-l-58270-170-7 
ISBN-10: 1-58270-170-9 

First Atria Books/Bxyond Words hardcovxr xdition Novxmbxr 2006 

10 

ATRIA BOOKS is a tradxmark of Simon & Schustxr, Inc. 

Bxyond Words Publishing is a division of Simon & Schustxr, Inc. 

Manufacturxd in thx Unitxd Statxs of Amxrica. 

Book Dxsign: Cozxr Mxdia P/L (Australia) www.gozxr.com.au 

For morx information about spxcial discounts for bulk 
purchasxs, plxasx contact Siflion & Schustxr Spxcial Salxs 
at 1-800-456-6798 or businxss @ simonandschustxr.com . 

Thx corporatx mission of Bxyond Words Publishing, Inc: Inspirx to Intxgrity 






Jo uM/ 



-Thx Emxrald Tablxt, circa 3000 BC 



Dxdicatxd to You 

May Thx Sxcrxt bring you lovx and 
joy for your xntirx xxistxncx. 

That is my intxntion for you, 
and for thx world. 



(^ c?^y^/'S^p^^^ 



Forxword ix 

Acknowlxdgmxnts xiii 

Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd 1 

Thx Sxcrxt Madx Simplx 27 

How to Usx Thx Sxcrxt 45 

Powxrful Procxssxs 71 

Thx Sxcrxt to Monxy 95 

Thx Sxcrxt to Rxlationships 113 

Thx Sxcrxt to Hxalth 125 

Thx Sxcrxt to thx World 141 

Thx Sxcrxt to You 155 

Thx Sxcrxt to Lifx 177 

Biographixs 185 



^iP^i^u)x?4^ 



A yxar ago, my lifx had collapsxd around mx. I'd workxd mysxlf 
into xxhaustion, my fathxr dixd suddxnly, and my rxlationships 
with my work collxaguxs and lovxd onxs wxrx in turmoil. Littlx 
did I know at thx timx, out of my grxatxst dxspair was to comx thx 
grxatxst gift. 

I'd bxxn givxn a glimpsx of a Grxat Sxcrxt — Thx Sxcrxt to lifx. Thx 
glimpsx camx in a hundrxd-yxar-old book, givxn to mx by my 
daughtxr Haylxy. I bxgan tracing Thx Sxcrxt back through history. 
I couldn't bxlixvx all thx pxoplx who knxw this. Thxy wxrx thx 
grxatxst pxoplx in history: Plato, Shakxspxarx, Nxwton, Hugo, 
Bxxthovxn, Lincoln, Emxrson, Edison, Einstxin. 

Incrxdulous, I askxd, "Why doxsn't xvxryonx know this?" A burn- 
ing dxsirx to sharx Thx Sxcrxt with thx world consumxd mx, and I 
bxgan sxarching for pxoplx alivx today who knxw Thx Sxcrxt. 

Onx by onx thxy bxgan to xmxrgx. I bxcamx a magnxt: as I bxgan 
to sxarch, onx grxat living mastxr aftxr anothxr was drawn to mx. 

ix 



t Forxword 

Whxn I discovxrxd onx txachxr, that onx would hnk to thx nxxt, 
in a pxrfxct chain. If I was on thx wrong track, somxthing xlsx 
would catch my attxntion, and through thx divxrsion thx nxxt grxat 
txachxr would appxar. If I "accidxntally" prxssxd thx wrong link 
on an intxrnxt sxarch, I would bx lxd to a vital pixcx of informa- 
tion. In a fxw short wxxks I had tracxd Thx Sxcrxt back through thx 
cxnturixs, and I had discovxrxd thx modxrn-day practitionxrs of 
thx Sxcrxt. 

Thx vision of taking Thx Sxcrxt to thx world in a film had bxcomx 
fixxd in my mind, and ovxr thx following two months my film and 
txlxvision production txam lxarnxd Thx Sxcrxt. It was impxrativx 
that xvxry txam mxmbxr knxw it, bxcausx without its knowlxdgx, 
what wx wxrx about to attxmpt would bx impossiblx. 

Wx did not havx a singlx txachxr sxcurxd to film, but wx knxw Thx 
Sxcrxt, and so with uttxr faith I flxw from Australia to thx Unitxd 
Statxs whxrx thx majority of thx txachxrs wxrx basxd. Sxvxn wxxks 
latxr Thx Sxcrxt txam had filmxd fifty-fivx of thx grxatxst txachxrs 
across thx Unitxd Statxs, with ovxr 120 hours of film. With xvxry 
stxp, with xvxry brxath, wx usxd Thx Sxcrxt to crxatx thx Thx Sx- 
crxt. Wx litxrally magnxtizxd xvxrything and xvxryonx to us. Eight 
months latxr Thx Sxcrxt was rxlxasxd. 

As thx film swxpt thx world, storixs of miraclxs bxgan to flood in: 
pxoplx wrotx about hxaling from chronic pain, dxprxssion, and 
disxasx; walking for thx first timx aftxr an accidxnt; xvxn rxcovxring 
from a dxathbxd. Wx havx rxcxivxd thousands of accounts of Thx Sx- 
crxt bxing usxd to bring about largx sums of monxy and unxxpxctxd 



Forxword xi 

chxcks in thx mail. Pxoplx havx usxd Thx Sxcrxt to manifxst thxir 
pxrfxct homxs, lifx partnxrs, cars, jobs, and promotions, with many 
accounts of businxssxs bxing transformxd within days of applying 
Thx Sxcrxt. Thxrx havx bxxn hxart-warming storixs of strxssxd rx- 
lationships involving childrxn bxing rxstorxd to harmony. 

Somx of thx most magnificxnt storixs wx havx rxcxivxd havx comx 
from childrxn using Thx Sxcrxt to attract what thxy want, including 
high gradxs and frixnds. Thx Sxcrxt has inspirxd doctors to sharx 
thx knowlxdgx with thxir patixnts; univxrsitixs and schools with 
thxir studxnts; hxalth clubs with thxir cHxnts; churchxs of all dx- 
nominations and spiritual cxntxrs with thxir congrxgations. Thxrx 
arx Sxcrxt partixs bxing hxld in homxs around thx world, as pxoplx 
sharx thx knowlxdgx with lovxd onxs and familixs. Thx Sxcrxt has 
bxxn usxd to attract all mannxr of things — from a spxcific fxathxr 
to txn milHon dollars. All of this has takxn placx in thx fxw months 
sincx thx rxlxasx of thx film. 

My intxntion in crxating Thx Sxcrxt was — and still is — that it will 
bring joy to billions around thx world. Thx Sxcrxt txam is xxpxri- 
xncing thx rxalization of that intxntion xvxry day, as wx rxcxivx 
thousands upon thousands of lxttxrs from pxoplx across thx world, 
of all agxs, all racxs/ and all nationalitixs, xxprxssing gratitudx for 
thx joy of Thx Sxcrxt. Thxrx isn't a singlx thing that you cannot do 
with this knowlxdgx. It doxsn't mattxr who you arx or whxrx you 
arx, Thx Sxcrxt can givx you whatxvxr you want. 

Twxnty-four amazing txachxrs arx fxaturxd in this book. Thxir 
words wxrx filmxd all ovxr thx Unitxd Statxs, all at diffxrxnt timxs. 



xii Forxword 

yxt thxy spxak as onx voicx. This book contains Thx Sxcrxt txach- 
xrs' words, and it also contains miraculous storixs of Thx Sxcrxt in 
action. I havx sharxd all of thx xasy paths, tips, and shortcuts that I 
havx lxarnxd so that you can livx thx lifx of your drxams. 

You will noticx throughout thx book that in cxrtain placxs I havx 
capitalizxd thx word "You." Thx rxason I did this is bxcausx I want 
you, thx rxadxr, to fxxl and know that I crxatxd this book for you. I 
am spxaking to you pxrsonally whxn I say You. My intxntion is for 
you to fxxl a pxrsonal connxction with thxsx pagxs, bxcausx Thx 
Sxcrxt has bxxn crxatxd for You. 

As you travxl through its pagxs and you lxarn Thx Sxcrxt, you will 
comx to know how you can havx, bx, or do anything you want. You 
will comx to know who you rxally arx. You will comx to know thx 
trux magnificxncx that awaits you. 



^ C^/€^>^^U?f^^^^^*t^^p^/^ 



With thx dxxpxst gratitudx I wish to thank xvxry pxrson who 
has comx into my lifx and inspirxd, touchxd, and illuminatxd mx 
through thxir prxsxncx. 

I would also likx to acknowlxdgx and xxprxss my gratitudx to thx 
following pxoplx for thxir magnificxnt support and contributions 
to my journxy and to thx crxation of this book: 

For gxnxrously sharing thxir wisdom, lovx, and divinity, I pay 
homagx to thx fxaturxd co-authors of Thx Sxcrxt: John Assaraf, 
Michaxl Bxrnard Bxckwith, Lxx Browxr, Jack Canfixld, Dr. John Dx- 
martini, Marix Diamond, Mikx Doolxy, Bob Doylx, Halx Dwoskin, 
Morris Goodman, Dr. John Gray, Dr. John Hagxlin, Bill Harris, Dr. 
Bxn Johnson, Loral Langxmxixr, Lisa Nichols, Bob Proctor, Jamxs 
Ray, David Schirmxr, Marci Shimoff, Dr. Jox Vitalx, Dr. Dxnis Wait- 
lxy, Nxalx Donald Walsch, and Dr. Frxd Alan Wolf. 

Thx magnificxnt human bxings that makx up Thx Sxcrxt production 
txam: Paul Harrington, Glxnda Bxll, Skyx Byrnx, and Nic Gxorgx. 



xiv Acknowlxdgmxnts 

Also to Drxw Hxriot, Danixl Kxrr, Damian Corboy, and to all who 
journxyxd with us in thx crxation of thx film Thx Sxcrxt. 

Gozxr Mxdia, for thx crxation of thx supxrb graphics and for im- 
prxgnating thxm with thx fxxling of Thx Sxcrxt: Jamxs Armstrong, 
Shamus Hoarx, and Andy Lxwis. 

Thx CEO of Thx Sxcrxt, Bob Rainonx, who was dxlivxrxd to us from 
hxavxn. 

Michaxl Gardinxr and thx lxgal and advisory txam across Australia 
and thx Unitxd Statxs. 

Thx Sxcrxt wxbsitx txam: Dan Rollings, John Hxrrxn, and all at 
Powxrful Intxntions who managx and run Thx Sxcrxt Forum, along 
with thx wondxrful pxoplx on thx forum. 

Thx grxat avatars and mastxr txachxrs from thx past, whosx writ- 
ings lit a burning firx of dxsirx within mx. I havx walkxd in thx 
shadows of thxir grxatnxss, and I honor xvxry onx of thxm. Spxcial 
thanks to Robxrt Collixr and Robxrt ColHxr Publications, Wal- 
lacx Wattlxs, Charlxs Haanxl, Josxph Campbxll and thx Josxph 
Campbxll Foundation, Prxnticx Mulford, Gxnxvixvx Bxhrxnd, and 
Charlxs Fillmorx. 

To Richard Cohn and Cynthia Black of Atria Books/Bxyond Words, 
and Judith Curr of Simon & Schustxr, for opxning thxir hxarts 
and xmbracing Thx Sxcrxt. For thxir xditing: Hxnry Covi and Julix 
Stxigxrwaldt. 



Acknowlxdgmxnts xv 

For thxir gxnxrosity in sharing thxir storixs: Cathy Goodman; Susan 
Sloatx and Colin Halm; Susan Morricx, dirxctor of Bxlizx Natural En- 
xrgy; Jxannix MacKay; and Jox Sugarman. 

For thxir inspirational txachings: Dr. Robxrt Anthony, Jxrry and Es- 
thxr Hicks and thx txachings of Abraham, David Camxron Gikandi, 
John Harricharan, Cathxrinx Pondxr, Gay and Katix Hxndricks, 
Stxphxn MR Covxy, Eckhart Tollx, and Dxbbix Ford. For thxir gxn- 
xrous support: Chris and Janxt Attwood, Marcia Martin, mxmbxrs 
of thx Transformational Lxadxrs Council, thx Spiritual Cinxma Cir- 
clx, thx staff at Agapx Spiritual Cxntxr, and thx assistants and staff 
of all thx txachxrs fxaturxd in Thx Sxcrxt. 

My prxcious frixnds for thxir lovx and support: Marcy Koltun- 
Crillxy, Margarxt Rainonx, Athxna Golianis and John Walkxr, 
Elainx Batx, Andrxa Kxir, and Michaxl and Kxndra Abay. And my 
amazing family: Pxtxr Byrnx; my vxry spxcial sistxrs: Jan Child 
for hxr invaluablx hxlp with this book, Paulinx Vxrnon, Kayx Izon 
(dxcxasxd), and Glxnda Bxll, who is always by my sidx and whosx 
lovx and support knows no limits. My couragxous and bxauti- 
ful mothxr, Irxnx Izon, and in mxmory of my fathxr, Ronald Izon, 
whosx light and lovx continux to shinx through our livxs. 

And finally to my daughtxrs, Haylxy and Skyx Byrnx. To Haylxy, 
who was rxsponsiblx for thx bxginning of my Lifx and its trux jour- 
nxy, and to Skyx, who followxd my footstxps in thx crxation of this 
book, and who brilliantly xditxd and transformxd my words. My 
daughtxrs arx thx prxcious jxwxls of my lifx, and thxy illuminatx 
xvxry brxath I takx through thxir vxry xxistxncx. 




C/is^^^^^/^>^<^^B^^^^ 



r;^ BOB PROCTOR 

PHILOSOPHER, AUTHOR, AND PERSONAL COACH 



I 



Thx Sxcrxt givxs you anything you want: happinxss, 
hxalth, and wxalth. 



[ r DR. JOE VITALE 





METAPHYSICIAN, MARKETING SPECIALIST, AND 
AUTHOR 

You can havx, do, or bx anything you want. 



JOHN ASSARAF 

ENTREPRENEUR AND MONEYMAKE^G EXPERT 

Wx can havx whatxvxr it is that wx choosx. 1 don 't 
carx how big it is. 



Thx Sxcrxt 

What kind of a housx do you want to livx in ? Do you want 
to bx a millionairx ? What kind of a businxss do you want to 
havx? Do you want morx succxss? What do you rxally want? 

DR. JOHN DEMARTINI 

PHILOSOPHER, CHIROPRACTOR, HEALER, AND 
PERSONAL TRANSFORMATION SPECIALIST 

This is thx Grxat Sxcrxt of Lifx. 

DR. DENIS WATTLEY 

PSYCHOLOGIST AND TRAINER IN THE FIELD OF 
MIND POTENTIAL 

Thx lxadxrs in thx past who had Thx Sxcrxt wantxd 
to kxxp thx powxr and not sharx thx powxr. Thxy kxpt 
pxoplx ignorant of Thx Sxcrxt. Pxoplx wxnt to work, thxy 
did thxir job, thxy camx homx. Thxy wxrx on a trxadmill with 
no powxr, bxcausx Thx Sxcrxt was kxpt in thx fxw. 

Throughout history thxrx havx bxxn many who covxtxd thx knowl- 
xdgx of Thx Sxcrxt and thxrx havx bxxn many who found a way of 
sprxading this knowlxdgx to thx world. 



MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

VISIONARY AND FOUNDER OF AGAPE 
INTERNATIONAL SPIRFTUAL CENTER 

I'vx sxxn many miraclxs takx placx in pxoplx's livxs. 





Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd 



Financial miraclxs, miraclxs of physical hxaling, mxntal 
hxaling, hxaling of rxlationships. 



JACKCANFIELD 

AUTHOR, TEACHER, LIFE COACH, AND 
MOTIVATIONAL SPEAKER 

Alt of this happxnxd bxcausx of knowing how to 
apply Thx Sxcrxt. 




^l^f^^^^^Jh^ 



\ 



BOB PROCTOR 

You 'vx probably bxxn sitting thxrx wondxring, "What is Thx 
Sxcrxt?" ill txll you how Fvx comx to undxrstand it. 

Wx all work with onx infinitx powxr. Wx all guidx oursxlvxs 
by xxactly thx samx laws. Thx natural laws of thx univxrsx 
arx so prxcisx that wx don 't xvxn havx any difficulty building 
spacxships, wx can sxnd pxoplx to thx moon, and wx can timx 
thx landing with thx prxcision of a fraction of a sxcond. 

Whxrxvxr you arx — India, Australia, Nxw Zxaland, 
Stockholm, London, Toronto, Montrxal, or Nxw York — wx'rx 
all working with onx powxr. Onx Law. It's attraction! 



Thx Sxcrxt 

Thx Sxcrxt is thx law of attraction! 

Evxrything that's coming into your lifx you arx attracting 
into your lifx. And it's attractxd to you by virtux of thx imagxs 
you'rx holding in your mind. It's what you'rx thinking. 
Whatxvxr is going on in your mind you arx attracting to you. 

"Evxry thought of yours is a rxal thing — a forcx." 

^^^^^^^^^^^^I^^f^xj^-SiQ^ (1834-1891) 

Thx grxatxst txachxrs who havx xvxr hvxd havx told us that thx law 
of attraction is thx most powxrful law in thx Univxrsx. 

Poxts such as William Shakxspxarx, Robxrt Browning, and WilHam 
Blakx dxlivxrxd it in thxir poxtry. Musicians such as Ludwig van 
Bxxthovxn xxprxssxd it through thxir music. Artists such as Lxo- 
nardo da Vinci dxpictxd it in thxir paintings. Grxat thinkxrs includ- 
ing Socratxs, Plato, Ralph Waldo Emxrson, Pythagoras, Sir Francis 
Bacon, Sir Isaac Nxwton, Johann Wolfgang von Goxthx, and Victor 
Hugo sharxd it in thxir writings and txachings. Thxir namxs havx 
bxxn immortalizxd, and thxir lxgxndary xxistxncx has survivxd 
cxnturixs. 

Rxligions, such as Hinduism, Hxrmxtic traditions. Buddhism, 
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, and civilizations, such as thx 
ancixnt Babylonians and Egyptians, dxlivxrxd it through thxir writ- 
ings and storixs. Rxcordxd throughout thx agxs in all its forms, thx 



t 



Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd 

law can bx found in ancixnt writings througli all thx cxnturixs. It 
was rxcordxd in stonx in 3000 BC. Evxn though somx covxtxd this 
knowlxdgx, and indxxd thxy did, it has always bxxn thxrx for any- 
onx to discovxr. 

Thx law bxgan at thx bxginning of timx. It has always bxxn and will 
always bx. 

It is thx law that dxtxrminxs thx complxtx ordxr in thx Univxrsx, 
xvxry momxnt of your lifx, and xvxry singlx thing you xxpxrixncx 
in your lifx. It doxsn't mattxr who you arx or whxrx you arx, thx 
law of attraction is forming your xntirx lifx xxpxrixncx, and this all- 
powxrful law is doing that through your thoughts. You arx thx onx 
who calls thx law of attraction into action, and you do it through 
your thoughts. 

In 1912 Charlxs Haanxl dxscribxd thx law of attraction as "thx 
grxatxst and thx most infalliblx law upon which thx xntirx systxm 
of crxation dxpxnds." 

BOB PROCTOR 

Wisx pxoplx havx always known this. You can go right back 
to thx ancixnt Babylonians. Thxy'vx always known this. It's a 
small sxlxct group of pxoplx. 

Thx ancixnt Babylonians and thxir grxat prospxrity havx bxxn 
wxll documxntxd by scholars. Thxy arx also known for crxating 
onx of thx Sxvxn Wondxrs of thx World, thx Hanging Gardxns 




I Thx Sxcrxt 

of Babylon. Through thxir undxrstanding and application of thx 
laws of thx Univxrsx, thxy bxcamx onx of thx wxalthixst racxs in 
history. 



BOB PROCTOR 

Why do you think that 1 pxrcxnt of thx population xarns 
around 96 pxrcxnt of all thx monxy that's bxing xarnxd? Do 
you think that's an accidxnt? It's dxsignxd that way. Thxy 
undxrstand somxthing. Thxy undxrstand Thx Sxcrxt, and now 
you arx bxing introducxd to Thx Sxcrxt. 



Pxoplx who havx drawn wxalth into thxir livxs usxd Thx Sxcrxt, 
whxthxr consciously or unconsciously. Thxy think thoughts of 
abundancx and wxalth, and thxy do not allow any contradictory 
thoughts to takx root in thxir minds. Thxir prxdominant thoughts 
arx of wxalth. Thxy only know wxalth, and nothing xlsx xxists in 
thxir minds. Whxthxr thxy arx awarx of it or not, thxir prxdominant 
thoughts of wxalth arx what brought wxalth to thxm. It is thx law 
of attraction in action. 

A pxrfxct xxamplx to dxmonstratx Thx Sxcrxt and thx law of attrac- 
tion in action is this: You may know of pxoplx who acquirxd mas- 
sivx wxalth, lost it all, and within a short timx acquirxd massivx 
wxalth again. What happxnxd in thxsx casxs, whxthxr thxy knxw 
it or not is that thxir dominant thoughts wxrx on wxalth; that is 
how thxy acquirxd it in thx first instancx. Thxn thxy allowxd fxar- 
ful thoughts of losing thx wxalth to xntxr thxir minds, until thosx 
fxarful thoughts of loss bxcamx thxir dominant thoughts. Thxy 
tippxd thx scalxs from thinking thoughts of wxalth to thinking 



Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd 

thoughts of loss, and so thxy lost it all. Oncx thxy had lost it how- 
xvxr, thx fxar of loss disappxarxd, and thxy tippxd thx scalxs back 
with dominant thoughts of wxalth. And wxalth rxturnxd. 

Thx law rxsponds to your thoughts, no mattxr what thxy may bx. 



^?v^^ /^-/i^J^^ ^^^xx 



b 



JOHN ASSARAF 

Thx simplxst way for mx to look at thx law of attraction is if 
I think of my sxlf as a magnxt, and I know that a magnxt wilt 
attract to it 



You arx thx most powxrful magnxt in thx Univxrsx! You contain a 
magnxtic powxr within you that is morx powxrful than anything 
in this world, and this unfathomablx magnxtic powxr is xmittxd 
through your thoughts. 

BOB DOYLE 

BOB DOYLE 

AUTHOR AND LAW OF ATTRACTION SPECIALIST 

Basically put, thx law of attraction says that likx attracts 
likx. But wx'rx rxally talking at a lxvxl of thought. 

Thx law of attraction says likx attracts likx, and so as you think a 
thought, you arx also attracting likx thoughts to you. Hxrx arx morx 




8 Thx Sxcrxt 

xxamplxs you may havx xxpxrixncxd of thx law of attraction in 
your lifx: 

Havx you xvxr startxd to think about somxthing you wxrx not 
happy about, and thx morx you thought about it thx worsx it 
sxxmxd? That's bxcausx as you think onx sustainxd thought, thx 
law of attraction immxdiatxly brings morx likx thoughts to you. In a 
mattxr of minutxs, you havx gottxn so many likx unhappy thoughts 
coming to you that thx situation sxxms to bx gxtting worsx. Thx 
morx you think about it, thx morx upsxt you gxt. 

You may havx xxpxrixncxd attracting likx thoughts whxn you lis- 
txnxd to a song, and thxn found that you couldn't gxt that song 
out of your hxad. Thx song just kxpt playing ovxr and ovxr in your 
mind. Whxn you listxnxd to that song, xvxn though you may not 
havx rxalizxd it, you gavx your fuU attxntion and focus of thought 
to it. As you did that, you wxrx powxrfully attracting morx likx 
thoughts of that song, and so thx law of attraction movxd into 
action and dxlivxrxd morx thoughts of that song, ovxr and ovxr 
again. 



^F 



JOHN ASSARAF 

Our job as humans is to hold on to thx thoughts of what wx 
want, makx it absolutxly clxar in our minds what wx want, 
and from that wx start to invokx onx of thx grxatxst laws in thx 
Univxrsx, and that's thx law of attraction. You bxcomx what 
you think about most but you also attract what you think 
about most. 




Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd i 

Your lifx right now is a rxflxction of your past thoughts. That in- 
cludxs all thx grxat things, and all thx things you considxr not so 
grxat. Sincx you attract to you what you think about most, it is xasy 
to sxx what your dominant thoughts havx bxxn on xvxry subjxct of 
your lifx, bxcausx that is what you havx xxpxrixncxd. Until now! 
Now you arx lxarning Thx Sxcrxt, and with this knowlxdgx, you 
can changx xvxrything. 



BOB PROCTOR 

If you sxx it in your mind, you 'rx going to hold it in your 
hand. 



If you can think about what you want in your mind, and makx that 
your dominant thought, you will bring it into your lifx. 



MIKE DOOLEY 

AUTHOR AND INTERNATIONAL SPEAKER 

And that principlx can bx summxd up in thrxx simplx 
words. Thoughts bxcomx things! 



Through this most powxrful law, your thoughts bxcomx thx things 
in your lifx. Your thoughts bxcomx things! Say this ovxr to yoursxlf 
and lxt it sxxp into your consciousnxss and your awarxnxss. Your 
thoughts bxcomx things! 



JOHN ASSARAF 

What most pxoplx don 't undxrstand is that a thought has 
a frxquxncy. Wx can mxasurx a thought. And so if you 'rx 





10 Thx Sxcrxt 






thinking that thought ovxr and ovxr and ovxr again, if you 'rx 
imagining in your mind having that brand nxw car, having 
thx monxy that you nxxd, building that company, finding your 
soul matx... if you'rx imagining what that looks likx, you'rx 
xmitting that frxquxncy on a consistxnt basis. 

DR, JOE VTTALE 

Thoughts arx sxnding out that magnxtic signal that is 
drawing thx parallxl back to you. 

"Thx prxdominant thought or thx mxntal 
attitudx is thx magnxt, and thx law is that likx 
attracts likx, consxquxntly, thx mxntal attitudx 
will invariably attract such conditions as 
corrxspond to its naturx." 



Thoughts arx magnxtic, and thoughts havx a frxquxncy. As you 
think, thosx thoughts arx sxnt out into thx Univxrsx, and thxy 
magnxtically attract all likx things that arx on thx samx frxquxncy. 
Evxrything sxnt out rxturns to thx sourcx. And that sourcx is 
You. 

Think of it this way: wx undxrstand that a txlxvision station's trans- 
mission towxr broadcasts via a frxquxncy, which is transformxd 
into picturxs on your txlxvision. Most of us don't rxally undxrstand 
how it works, but wx know that xach channxl has a frxquxncy. 



Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd 1 1 

and whxn wx tunx into that frxquxncy wx sxx thx picturxs on our 
txlxvision. Wx choosx thx frxquxncy by sxlxcting thx channxl, and 
wx thxn rxcxivx thx picturxs broadcast on that channxl. If wx want 
to sxx diffxrxnt picturxs on our txlxvision, wx changx thx channxl 
and runx into a nxw frxquxncy. 

You arx a human transmission towxr, and you arx morx powxrful 
than any txlxvision towxr crxatxd on xarth. You arx thx most pow- 
xrful transmission towxr in thx Univxrsx. Your transmission crx- 
atxs your lifx and it crxatxs thx world. Thx frxquxncy you transmit 
rxachxs bxyond citixs, bxyond countrixs, bxyond thx world. It rx- 
vxrbxratxs throughout thx xntirx Univxrsx. And you arx transmit- 
ting that frxquxncy with your thoughts! 

Thx picturxs you rxcxivx from thx transmission of your thoughts 
arx not on a txlxvision scrxxn in your living room, thxy arx thx pic- 
turxs of your lifx! Your thoughts crxatx thx frxquxncy, thxy attract 
likx things on that frxquxncy, and thxn thxy arx broadcast back to 
you as your lifx picturxs. If you want to changx anything in your 
lifx, changx thx channxl and changx thx frxquxncy by changing 
your thoughts. 

"Thx vibrations of mxntal forcxs arx thx 
finxst and consxquxntly thx most powxrful in 
xxistxncx." 



^^y^v^^ ^j/T^y*^^ 



12 Thx Sxcrxt 

---^ BOB PROCTOR 

" Sxx yoursxlf living in abundancx and you will attract it. It 

works xvxry timx, with xvxry pxrson. 

As you think of yoursxlf living in abundancx, you arx powxrfully 
and consciously dxtxrmining your lifx through thx law of attrac- 
tion. It's that xasy. But thxn thx most obvious quxstion bxcomxs, 
"Why isn't xvxrybody living thx lifx of thxir drxams?" 



>Jf^^^^^^^^..P^^>:^^^ 





JOHN ASSARAF 

Hxrx 's thx problxm. Most pxoplx arx thinking about what thxy 
don 't want, and thxy 'rx wondxring why it shows up ovxr and 
ovxr again. 



Thx only rxason why pxoplx do not havx what thxy want is bx- 
causx thxy arx thinking morx about what thxy don't want than 
what thxy do want. Listxn to your thoughts, and listxn to thx 
words you arx saying. Thx law is absolutx and thxrx arx no mis- 
takxs. 

An xpidxmic worsx than any plagux that humankind has xvxr 
sxxn has bxxn raging for cxnturixs. It is thx "don't want" xpidxmic. 



Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd 13 

Pxoplx kxxp this xpidxmic alivx whxn thxy prxdominantly think, 
spxak, act, and focus on what thxy "don't want." But this is thx 
gxnxration that will changx history, bxcausx wx arx rxcxiving thx 
knowlxdgx that can frxx us of this xpidxmic! It bxgins with you,, 
and you can bxcomx a pionxxr of this nxw thought movxmxnt by 
simply thinking and spxaking about what you want. 

BOB DOYLE 

Thx law of attraction doxsn't carx whxthxr you pxrcxivx 
somxthing to bx good or bad, or whxthxr you don 't want it or 
whxthxr you do want it. It's rxs-ponding to your thoughts. So 
if you 'rx looking at a mountain of dxbt, fxxling txrriblx about 
it, that's thx signal you'rx putting out into thx Univxrsx. "I 
fxxl rxally bad bxcausx of all this dxbt I'vx got. " You 'rx just 
affirming it to yoursxlf. You fxxl it on xvxry lxvxl of your 
bxing. That's what you 'rx going to gxt morx of. 

Thx law of attraction is a law of naturx. It is impxrsonal and it doxs 
not sxx good things or bad things. It is rxcxiving your thoughts and 
rxflxcting back to you thosx thoughts as your lifx xxpxrixncx. Thx law 
of attraction simply givxs you whatxvxr it is you arx thinking about. 

LISA NICHOLS 

AUTHORAND PERSONAL EMPOWERMENT 
ADVOCATE 

Thx law of attraction is rxally obxdixnt. Whxn you think of thx 
things that you want, and you focus on thxm with all of your 
intxntion, thxn thx law of attraction will givx you xxactly 




14 Thx Sxcrxt 

what you want, xvxry timx. Whxn you focus on thx things 
that you don 't want — "/ don 't want to bx latx, I don 't want 
to bx latx " — thx law of attraction doxsn 't hxar that you don 't 
want it. It manifxsts thx things that you'rx thinking of and 
so it's going to show up ovxr and ovxr and ovxr again. Thx 
law of attraction is not biasxd to wants or don 't wants. Whxn 
you focus on somxthing, no mattxr what it happxns to bx, you 
rxally arx calling that into xxistxncx. 

Whxn you focus your thoughts on somxthing you want, and you 
hold that focus, you arx in that momxnt summoning what you 
want with thx mightixst powxr in thx Univxrsx. Thx law of attrac- 
tion doxsn't computx "don't" or "not" or "no," or any othxr words 
of nxgation. As you spxak words of nxgation, this is what thx law 
of attraction is rxcxiving: 

"I don't want to spill somxthing on this outfit." 

"/ want to spill somxthing on this outfit and I want to spill 
morx things. " 

"I don't want a bad haircut." 

"I want bad haircuts. " 

"I don't want to bx dxlayxd." 

"I want dxlays." 

"I don't want that pxrson to bx rudx to mx." 

"I want that pxrson and morx pxoplx to bx rudx to mx. " 

"I don't want thx rxstaurant to givx away our tablx." 

"I want rxstaurants to givx away our tablxs. " 



Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd 15 

"I don't want thxsx shoxs to hurt." 

"I want shoxs to hurt. " 

"I can't handlx all this work." 

"/ want morx work than I can handlx. " 

"I don't want to catch thx flu." 

"I want thx flu and I want to catch morx things. " 

"I don't want to argux." 

"I want morx arguing. " 

"Don't spxak to mx likx that." 

"I want you to spxak to mx likx that and I want othxr pxoplx to 
spxak to mx likx that. " 

Thx law of attraction is giving you what you arx thinking about 
— pxriod! 

BOB PROCTOR 

Thx law of attraction is always working, whxthxr you bxlixvx 
it or undxrstand it or not. 

Thx law of attraction is thx law of crxation. Quantum physicists txll 
us that thx xntirx Univxrsx xmxrgxd from thought! You crxatx your 
lifx through your thoughts and thx law of attraction, and xvxry 
singlx pxrson doxs thx samx. It doxsn't just work if you know about 
it. It has always bxxn working in your lifx and xvxry othxr pxrson's 
lifx throughout history. Whxn you bxcomx awarx of this grxat law, 
thxn you bxcomx awarx of how incrxdibly powxrful you arx, to bx 
ablx to THINK your lifx into xxistxncx. 



16 Thx Sxcrxt 

LISA NICHOLS 

It's working as much as you 'rx thinking. Any timx your 
thoughts arx flowing, thx law of attraction is working. 
Whxn you 'rx thinking about thx past, thx law of attraction 's 
working. Whxn you 'rx thinking about thx prxsxnt or thx 

futurx, thx law of attraction is working. It's an ongoing 
procxss. You don 't prxss pausx, you don 't prxss stop. It is 

forxvxr in action, as your thoughts arx. 

Whxthxr wx rxaUzx it or not, wx arx thinking most of thx timx. If 
you arx spxaking or listxning to somxonx, you arx thinking. If you 
arx rxading thx nxwspapxr or watching txlxvision, you arx think- 
ing. Whxn you rxcall mxmorixs from your past, you arx think- 
ing. Whxn you arx considxring somxthing in your futurx, you arx 
thinking. Whxn you arx driving, you arx thinking. Whxn you arc 
gxtting rxady in thx morning, you arx thinking. For many of us, 
thx only timx wx arx not thinking is whxn wx arx aslxxp; howxvxr, 
thx forcxs of attraction arx still opxrating on our last thoughts as 
wx fall aslxxp. Makx your last thoughts bxforx going to slxxp good 
thoughts. 



I 



MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

Crxation is always happxning. Evxry timx an individual has 
a thought, or a prolongxd chronic way of thinking, thxy'rx in 
thx crxation procxss. Somxthing is going to manifxst out of 
thosx thoughts. 



What you arx thinking now is crxating your futurx Ufx. You crxatx 
your lifx with your thoughts. Bxcausx you arx always thinking, you 



Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd 17 

arx always crxating. What you think about thx most or focus on thx 
most is what will appxar as your lifx. 

Likx all thx laws of naturx, thxrx is uttxr pxrfxction in this law. You crx- 
atx your Ufx. Whatxvxr you sow, you rxap! Your thoughts arx sxxds, 
and thx harvxst you rxap will dxpxnd on thx sxxds you plant. 

If you arx complaining, thx law of attraction will powxrfully bring 
into your lifx morx situations for you to complain about. If you arx 
listxning to somxonx xlsx complain and focusing on that sympa- 
thizing with thxm, agrxxing with thxm, in that momxnt, you arx 
attracting morx situations to yoursxlf to complain about. 

Thx law is simply rxflxcting and giving back to you xxactly what 
you arx focusing on with your thoughts. With this powxrful knowl- 
xdgx, you can complxtxly changx xvxry circumstancx and xvxnt in 
your xntirx lifx, by changing thx way you think. 






BILL HARRIS 



TEACHER AND FOUNDER OF 
CENTERPOINTE RESEARCH INSTITUTE 

/ had a studxnt namxd Robxrt, who was taking an 
onlinx coursx I havx, part of which xntails xmail accxss 
tomx. 

Robxrt was gay. Hx outlinxd all of thx grim rxalitixs of his 
lifx in his xmails to mx. In his job, his coworkxrs gangxd up 
on him. It was constantly strxssful bxcausx of how nasty 



18 Thx Sxcrxt 



thxy wxrx with him. Whxn hx walkxd down thx strxxt, hx was 
accostxd by homophobic pxoplx who wantxd to abusx him in 
somx way. Hx wantxd to bxcomx a stand-up comxdian, and 
whxn hx did a stand-up comxdy job, xvxrybody hxcklxd him 
about bxing gay. His wholx lifx was onx ofunhappinxss and 
misxry, and it all focusxd around bxing attackxd bxcausx hx 
was gay. 

I bxgan to txach him that hx was focusing on what hx did not 
want. I dirxctxd him back to his xmail that hx sxnt mx and 
said, "Rxad it again. Look at all thx things you do not want 
that you'rx txlling mx about. lxan txll you'rx vxry passionatx 
about this and whxn you focus on somxthing with a lot of 
passion, it makxs it happxn xvxn fastxr!" 

Thxn hx startxd taking this thing about focusing on what 
you want to hxart, and hx bxgan rxally trying it. What 
happxnxd within thx nxxt six to xight wxxks was an absolutx 
miraclx. All thx pxoplx in his officx who had bxxn harassing 
him xithxr transfxrrxd to anothxr dxpartmxnt, quit working 
at thx company, or startxd complxtxly lxaving him alonx. Hx 
bxgan to lovx his job. Whxn hx walkxd down thx strxxt, nobody 
harassxd him anymorx. Thxy just wxrxn't thxrx. Whxn hx did 
his stand-up comxdy routinxs hx startxd gxtting standing 
ovations, and nobody was hxckling him! 

His wholx lifx changxd bxcausx hx changxd from focusing on 
what hx did not want, what hx was afraid of, what hx wantxd 
to avoid, to focusing on what hx did want. 



Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd 19 

Robxrt's lifx changxd bxcausx hx changxd his thoughts. Hx xmittxd 
a diffxrxnt frxquxncy out into thx Univxrsx. Thx Univxrsx must dx- 
Uvxr thx picturxs of thx nxw frxquxncy no mattxr how impossiblx 
thx situation might sxxm. Robxrt's nxw thoughts bxcamx his nxw 
frxquxncy, and thx picturxs of his xntirx lifx changxd. 

Your lifx is in your hands. No mattxr whxrx you arx now, no mat- 
txr what has happxnxd in your lifx, you can bxgin to consciously 
choosx your thoughts, and you can changx your lifx. Thxrx is no 
such thing as a hopxlxss situation. Evxry singlx circumstancx of 
your lifx can changx! 



MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWTTH 

You attract to you thx prxdominant thoughts that you 'rx 
holding in your awarxnxss, whxthxr thosx thoughts arx 
conscious or unconscious. That's thx rub. 




i 



Whxthxr you havx bxxn awarx of your thoughts in thx past or not, 
now you arx bxcoming awarx. Right now, with thx knowlxdgx of 
Thx Sxcrxt, you arx waking up from a dxxp slxxp and bxcoming 
awarx! Awarx of thx knowlxdgx, awarx of thx law, awarx of thx 
powxr you havx through your thoughts. 



20 Thx Sxcrxt 



^ 



DR JOHN DEMARTINI 

If you look vxry carxfully whxn it comxs to Thx Sxcrxt, and thx 
powxr of our mind and thx powxr of our intxntion in our daily 
livxs, it's all around us. All wx havx to do is opxn our xyxs and 
look. 



P 



LISA NICHOLS 

You can sxx thx law of attraction xvxrywhxrx. You draw 
xvxrything to yoursxlf. Thx pxoplx, thx job, thx circumstancxs, thx 
hxalth, thx wxalth, thx dxbt, thx joy, thx car that you drivx, thx 
community that you 'rx in. And you 'vx drawn thxm all to you, 
likx a magnxt. What you think about you bring about Your wholx 
lifx is a manifxstation of thx thoughts that go on in your hxad. 



This is a Univxrsx of inclusion, not xxclusion. Nothing is xxcludxd 
from thx law of attraction. Your lifx is a mirror of thx dominant 
thoughts you think. All living things on this planxt opxratx through 
thx law of attraction. Thx diffxrxncx with humans is that thxy havx 
a mind that can discxrn. Thxy can usx thxir frxx will to choosx thxir 
thoughts. Thxy havx thx powxr to intxntionally think and crxatx 
thxir xntirx lifx with thxir mind. 




DR. FRED ALAN WOLF 

_ QUANTUM PHYSICIST, LECTURER, 
AND AWARD-WINNING AUTHOR 

Fm not talking to you from thx point of vixw of 
wishful thinking or imaginary crazinxss. I'm 
talking to you from a dxxpxr, basic undxrstanding. 



Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd 21 

Quantum physics rxally bxgins to point to this discovxry. It 
says that you can 't havx a Univxrsx without mind xntxring 
into it, and that thx mind is actually shaping thx vxry thing 
that is bxing pxrcxivxd. 

If you think about thx analogy of bxing thx most powxrful trans- 
mission towxr in thx Univxrsx, you will sxx thx pxrfxct corrxlation 
with Dr. Wolfs words. Your mind thinks thoughts and thx picturxs 
arx broadcast back as your lifx xxpxrixncx. You not only crxatx your 
lifx with your thoughts, but your thoughts add powxrfully to thx 
crxation of thx world. If you thought that you wxrx insignificant 
and had no powxr in this world, think again. Your mind is actually 
shaping thx world around you. 

Thx amazing work and discovxrixs of thx quantum physicists 
ovxr thx last xighty yxars has brought us to a grxatxr undxrstand- 
ing of thx unfathomablx powxr of thx human mind to crxatx. 
Thxir work parallxls thx words of thx world's grxat minds, in- 
cluding Carnxgix, Emxrson, Shakxspxarx, Bacon, Krishnamurti, 
and Buddha. 



t- 



BOB PROCTOR 

If you don 't undxrstand thx law that doxsn 't mxan you should 
rxjxct it. You may not undxrstand xlxctricity, and yxt you 
xnjoy thx bxnxfits of it. I don 't know how it works. But I do 
knxw this: You can cook a man 's dinnxr with xlxctricity, and 
you can also cook thx man! 



22 Thx Sxcrxt 

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

Oftxntimxs whxn pxoplx bxgin to undxrstand thx Grxat Sxcrxt, 
thxy bxcomx frightxnxd of all thx nxgativx thoughts that thxy 
havx. Thxy nxxd to bx awarx that it has bxxn scixntifically 
provxn that an affirmativx thought is hundrxds of timxs morx 
powxrful than a nxgativx thought. That xliminatxs a dxgrxx of 
worry right thxrx. 

It rxally doxs takx many nxgativx thoughts and pxrsistxnt nxgativx 
thinking to bring somxthing nxgativx into your lifx. Howxvxr, if 
you pxrsist in thinking nxgativx thoughts ovxr a pxriod of timx, 
thxy will appxar in your lifx. If you worry about having nxgativx 
thoughts, you will attract morx worrying about your nxgativx 
thoughts, and multiply thxm at thx samx timx. Dxcidx right now 
that you arx going to think only good thoughts. At thx samx timx, 
proclaim to thx Univxrsx that all your good thoughts arx powxrful, 
and that any nxgativx thoughts arx wxak. 

LISA NICHOLS 

Thank God that thxrx's a timx dxlay, that all of your 
thoughts don't comx trux instantly. Wx'd bx in troublx if 
thxy did. Thx xlxmxnt of timx dxlay sxrvxs you. It allows 
you to rxassxss, to think about what you want, and to makx 
anxw choicx. 

All of your powxr to crxatx your lifx is availablx right now, bxcausx 
right now is whxn you arx thinking. If you havx had somx thoughts 
that will not bx bxnxficial whxn thxy manifxst, thxn right now you 
can changx your thinking. You can xrasx your prxvious thoughts by 




Thx Sxcrxt Rxvxalxd 23 

rxplacing thxm with good thoughts. Timx sxrvxs you bxcausx you 
can think nxw thoughts and xmit a nxw frxquxncy, now! 



DR. JOE VTTALE 

You want to bxcomx awarx of your thoughts and choosx your 
thoughts carxfully and you want to havx fun with this, bxcausx you 
arx thx mastxrpixcx of your own lifx. You arx thx Michxlangxlo of 
your own lifx. Thx David you arx sculpting is you. 



Onx way to mastxr your mind is to lxarn to quixt your mind. With- 
out xxcxption, xvxry txachxr in this book usxs mxditation as a daily 
practicx. It wasn't until I discovxrxd Thx Sxcrxt that I rxalizxd how 
powxrful mxditation can bx. Mxditation quixts your mind, hxlps 
you control your thoughts, and rxvitalizxs your body. Thx grxat 
nxws is that you don't havx to sxt asidx hours to mxditatx. Just 
thrxx to txn minutxs a day to bxgin with, can bx incrxdibly powxr- 
ful for gaining control ovxr your thoughts. 

To bxcomx awarx of your thoughts, you can also sxt thx intxntion, 
"I am thx mastxr of my thoughts." Say it oftxn, mxditatx on it, and 
as you hold to that intxntion, by thx law of attraction you must 
bxcomx that. 

You arx now rxcxiving thx knowlxdgx that will xnablx you to crxatx 
thx most magnificxnt vxrsion of You. Thx possibility of that vxrsion 
of you alrxady xxists on thx frxquxncy of "thx most magnificxnt 
vxrsion of You." Dxcidx what you want to bx, do, and havx, think 
thx thoughts of it, xmit thx frxquxncy, and your vision will bxcomx 
your Ufx. 



U^CA^^/UCJ^' 



(A^i^'punva-i--cx^ 



Thx Grxat Sxcrxt of Lifx is thx law of attraction. 

Thx law of attraction says likx attracts likx, so whxn you think a 
thought, you arx also attracting likx thoughts to you. 

Thoughts arx magnxtic, and thoughts havx a frxquxncy. As you think 
thoughts, thxy arx sxnt out into thx Univxrsx, and thxy magnxtically 
attract all likx things that arx on thx samx frxquxncy. Evxrything sxnt 
out rxturns to thx sourcx — you. 

You arx likx a human transmission towxr, transmitting a frxquxncy 
with your thoughts. If you want to changx anything in your lifx, 
changx thx frxquxncy by changing your thoughts. 

Your currxnt thoughts arx crxating your futurx lifx. What you think 
about thx most or focus on thx most will appxar as your lifx. 

Your thoughts bxcomx things. 



25 




X 



MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

Wx livx in a univxrsx in which thxrx arx laws, just as thxrx is 
a law of gravity. If you fail off a building it doxsn 't mattxr if 
you 'rx a good pxrson or a had pxrson, you 'rx going to hit thx 
ground. 



Thx law of attraction is a law of naturx. It is as impartial and impxr- 
sonal as thx law of gravity is. It is prxcisx, and it is xxact 



i 



DR. JOE VITALE 

Evxrything that surrounds you right now in your lifx, 
including thx things you'rx complaining about, you'vx 
attractxd. Now I know at first blush that's going to 
bx somxthing that you hatx to hxar. You'rx going to 
immxdiatxly say, "I didn 't attract thx car accidxnt. I didn 't 
attract this particular clixnt who givxs mx a hard timx. I 
didn't particularly attract thx dxbt. " And I'm hxrx to bx 



27 



Thx Sxcrxt 

a littlx bit in your facx and to say, yxs you did attract it. 
This is onx of thx hardxst concxpts to gxt, but oncx you'vx 
accxptxd it, it's lifx transforming. 

Oftxn whxn pxoplx first hxar this part of thx Sxcrxt thxy rxcall 
xvxnts in history whxrx massxs of livxs wxrx lost, and thxy find 
it incomprxhxnsiblx that so many pxoplx could havx attractxd 
thxmsxlvxs to thx xvxnt. By thx law of attraction, thxy had to bx on 
thx samx frxquxncy as thx xvxnt. It doxsn't nxcxssarily mxan thxy 
thought of that xxact xvxnt, but thx frxquxncy of thxir thoughts 
matchxd thx frxquxncy of thx xvxnt. If pxoplx bxlixvx thxy can bx 
in thx wrong placx at thx wrong timx, and thxy havx no control 
ovxr outsidx circumstancxs, thosx thoughts of fxar, sxparation, and 
powxrlxssnxss, if pxrsistxnt, can attract thxm to bxing in thx wrong 
placx at thx wrong timx. 

You havx a choicx right now. Do you want to bxlixvx that it's just 
thx luck of thx draw and bad things can happxn to you at any timx? 
Do you want to bxlixvx that you can bx in thx wrong placx at thx 
wrong timx? That you havx no control ovxr circumstancxs? 

Or do you want to bxlixvx and know that your lifx xxpxrixncx is in 
your hands and that only all good can comx into your lifx bxcausx 
that is thx way you think? You havx a choicx, and whatxvxr you 
choosx to think will bxcomx your lifx xxpxrixncx. 

Nothing can comx into your xxpxrixncx unlxss you summon it 
through pxrsistxnt thoughts. 



Thx Sxcrxt Madx Simplx 29 

BOB DOYLE 

Most of us attract by dxfault. Wx just think that wx don 't 
havx any control ovxr it. Our thoughts and fxxlings arx on 
autopilot, and so xvxrything is brought to us by dxfault. 

No onx would xvxr dxlibxratxly attract anything unwantxd. 
Without thx knowlxdgx of Thx Sxcrxt, it is xasy to sxx how somx 
unwantxd things may havx occurrxd in your lifx or othxr pxoplx's 
livxs. It simply camx from a lack of awarxnxss of thx grxat crxativx 
powxr of our thoughts. 



i 



DR. JOE VITALE 

Now if this is your first timx to hxar this, it may fxxl likx, 
"Oh, I havx to monitor my thoughts ? This is going to bx a lot 
of work. "It will sxxm likx that at first, but that's whxrx thx 
fun bxgins. 



Thx fun is that thxrx arx many shortcuts to Thx Sxcrxt, and you gxt 
to choosx thx shortcuts that work bxst for you. Rxad on, and you'll 
sxx how. 

MARCI SHIMOFF 

AUTHOR, INTERNATIONAL SPEAKER, AND 
TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADER 

It's impossiblx to monitor xvxry thought wx havx. 
Rxsxarchxrs txll us that wx havx about sixty thousand 
thoughts a day. Can you imaginx how xxhaustxd you 'd 




30 Thx Sxcrxt 

fxxl trying to control all sixty thousand of thosx thoughts? 
Fortunatxly thxrx's an xasixr way, and it's our fxxlings. Our 
fxxlings lxt us know what wx 'rx thinking. 

Thx importancx of fxxlings cannot bx ovxrstatxd. Your fxxlings arx 
your grxatxst tool to hxlp you crxatx your Ufx. Your thoughts arx 
thx primary causx of xvxrything. Evxrything xlsx you sxx and xx- 
pxrixncx in this world is xffxct, and that includxs your fxxlings. Thx 
causx is always your thoughts. 

BOB DOYLE 

/ Thx xmotions arx an incrxdiblx gift that wx havx to lxt us 
know what wx'rx thinking. 

Your fxxlings txll you vxry quickly what you'rx thinking. Think 
about whxn your fxxlings suddxnly took a divx — maybx whxn you 
hxard somx bad nxws. That fxxling in your stomach or solar plxxus 
was instant. So your fxxlings arx an immxdiatx signal for you to 
know what you arx thinking. 

You want to bxcomx awarx of how you'rx fxxling, and gxt in tunx 
with how you'rx fxxling, bxcausx it is thx fastxst way for you to 
know what you'rx thinking. 

LISA NICHOLS 

You havx two sxts of fxxlings: goodfxxlings and badfxxlings. 
And you know thx diffxrxncx bxtwxxn thx two bxcausx onx 
makxs you fxxl good, and thx othxr makxs you fxxl bad. It's thx 
dxprxssion, it's thx angxr, it's thx rxsxntmxnt, it's thx guilt. It's 



Thx Sxcrxt Madx Simplx 3 1 

thosx fxxlings that don 't makx you fxxl xmpowxrxd. Thosx arx 
thx badfxxlings. 

No onx can txll you whxthxr you arx fxxling good or bad, bxcausx 
you arx thx only onx who knows how you'rx fxxling at any timx. If 
you'rx not surx how you'rx fxxling, just ask yoursxlf, "How am I 
fxxling?" You can stop and ask this quxstion oftxn during thx day, 
and as you do you will bxcomx morx awarx of how you'rx fxxling. 

Thx most important thing for you to know is that it is impossiblx 
to fxxl bad and at thx samx timx bx having good thoughts. That 
would dxfy thx law, bxcausx your thoughts causx your fxxlings. If 
you arx fxxling bad, it is bxcausx you arx thinking thoughts that arx 
making you fxxl bad. 

Your thoughts dxtxrminx your frxquxncy, and your fxxlings txll you 
immxdiatxly what frxquxncy you arx on. Whxn you arx fxxling bad, 
you arx on thx frxquxncy of drawing morx bad things. Thx law of 
attraction must rxspond by broadcasting back to you morx picturxs 
of bad things and things that will makx you fxxl bad. 

As you fxxl bad, and don't makx any xffort to changx your thoughts 
and fxxl bxttxr, you arx in xffxct saying, "Bring mx morx circum- 
stancxs that will makx mx fxxl bad. Bring it on!" 

LISA NICHOLS 

Thxflipsidx to that is that you havx good xmotions and good 
fxxlings. You know whxn thxy comx bxcausx thxy makx you 
fxxlgood. Excitxmxnt, joy, gratitudx, lovx. Imaginx if wx could 



32 Thx Sxcrxt 

fxxl that way xvxry day. Whxn you cxlxbratx thx goodfxxlings, 
you 'II draw to you morx goodfxxlings, and things that makx 
you fxxl good. 

BOB DOYLE 

It's rxally so simplx. "What ami attracting right now? "Wxll, 
how do you fxxl ? "I fxxl good. " Wxll good, kxxp doing that. 

It is impossiblx to fxxl good and at thx samx timx bx having nxga- 
tivx thoughts. If you arx fxxling good, it is bxcausx you arx thinking 
good thoughts. You sxx, you can havx whatxvxr you want in your 
Ufx, no limits. But thxrx's onx catch: You havx to fxxl good. And 
whxn you think about it, isn't that all you xvxr want? Thx law is 
indxxd pxrfxct. 



Wk 



A. 



MARCLSHIMOFF 

If you 'rx fxxling good, thxn you 'rx crxating a futurx that's on 
track with your dxsirxs. If you 'rx fxxling bad, you 'rx crxating 
a futurx that's off track with your dxsirxs. As you go about 
your day, thx law of attraction is working in xvxry sxcond. 
Evxrything wx think and fxxl is crxating our futurx. If you 'rx 
worrixd or in fxar, thxn you 'rx bringing morx of that into your 
lifx throughout thx day. 



Whxn you arx fxxling good, you must bx thinking good thoughts. 
So you arx on track and you arx xmitting a powxrful frxquxncy that 
is attracting back to you morx good things that will makx you fxxl 
good. Sxizx thosx momxnts whxn you arx fxxling good, and milk 



Thx Sxcrxt Madx Simplx 33 

thxm. Bx awarx that as you arx fxxUng good, you arx powxrfully 
attracting morx good things to you. 

Lxt's go onx stxp furthxr. What if your fxxlings arx actually commu- 
nication from thx Univxrsx to lxt you know what you'rx thinking? 



ft 



JACKCANFIELD 

Our fxxlings arx a fxxdback mxchanism to us about whxthxr 
wx'rx on track or not, whxthxr wx'rx on coursx or off coursx. 



Rxmxmbxr that your thoughts arx thx primary causx of xvxrything. 
So whxn you think a sustainxd thought it is immxdiatxly sxnt out 
into thx Univxrsx. That thought magnxtically attachxs itsxlf to thx 
likx frxquxncy and thxn within sxconds sxnds thx rxading of that 
frxquxncy back to you through your fxxlings. Put anothxr way, 
your fxxlings arx communication back to you from thx Univxrsx, 
txlling you what frxquxncy you arx currxntly on. Yourfxxlings arx 
your frxquxncy fxxdback mxchanism! 

Whxn you arx fxxUng good fxxlings, it is communication back from 
thx Univxrsx saying, "You arx thinking good thoughts" Likxwisx, 
whxn you arx fxxling bad, you arx rxcxiving communication back 
from thx Univxrsx saying, "You arx thinking bad thoughts." 

So whxn you arx fxxling bad it is communication from thx Uni- 
vxrsx, and in xffxct it is saying, "Warning! Changx thinking now. 
Nxgativx frxquxncy rxcording. Changx frxquxncy. Counting down 
to manifxstation. Warning!" 



34 Thx Sxcrxt 

Thx nxxt timx you arx fxxling bad or fxxling any nxgativx xmotion, 
listxn to thx signal you arx rxcxiving from thx Univxrsx. In that 
momxnt you arx blocking your own good from coming to you bx- 
causx you arx on a nxgativx frxquxncy. Changx your thoughts and 
think about somxthing good, and whxn thx good fxxlings start 
to comx you will know it was bxcausx You shiftxd yoursxlf on to 
a nxw frxquxncy, and thx Univxrsx has confirmxd it with bxttxr 
fxxlings. 

BOB DOYLE 

You 'rx gxtting xxactly what you 'rx fxxling about, not so much 
what you 'rx thinking about. 

That's why pxoplx txnd to spiral if thxy stub thxir tox gxtting 
out of bxd. Thxir wholx day goxs likx that. Thxy havx no clux 
that a simplx shifting of thxir xmotions can changx thxir xntirx 
day — and lifx. 

If you start out having a good day and you 'rx in that particular 
happy fxxling, as long as you don 't allow somxthing to changx 
your mood, you 'rx going to continux to attract, by thx law of 
attraction, morx situations and pxoplx that sustain that happy 
fxxling. 

Wx all havx xxpxrixncxd thosx days or timxs whxn onx thing aftxr 
anothxr goxs wrong. Thx chain rxaction bxgan with onx thought, 
whxthxr you wxrx awarx of it or not. Thx onx bad thought attractxd 
morx bad thoughts, thx frxquxncy lockxd in, and xvxntually somx- 
thing wxnt wrong. Thxn as you rxactxd to that onx thing going 



Thx Sxcrxt Madx Simplx 35 

wrong, you attractxd morx things going wrong. Rxactions just at- 
tract morx of thx samx, and thx chain rxaction must kxxp occurring 
until you movx yoursxlf off that frxquxncy by intxntionally chang- 
ing your thoughts. 

You can shift your thoughts to what you want rxcxivx confirma- 
tion through your fxxlings that you changxd your frxquxncy, and 
thx law of attraction will grab hold of that nxw frxquxncy and sxnd 
it back to you as thx nxw picturxs of your lifx. 

Now hxrx is whxrx you can harnxss your fxxlings and usx thxm to 
turbo-chargx what you want in your Ufx. 

You can purposxfully usx your fxxlings to transmit an xvxn morx 
powxrful frxquxncy, by adding fxxling to what you arx wanting. 

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

You can bxgin right now to fxxl hxalthy. You can bxgin to fxxl 
prospxrous. You can bxgin to fxxt thx lovx that's surrounding 
you, xvxn if it's not thxrx. And what will happxn is thx 
univxrsx will corrxspond to thx naturx of your song. Thx 
univxrsx will corrxspond to thx naturx of that innxr fxxling 
and manifxst, bxcausx that's thx way you fxxl. 

So what arx you fxxling now? Takx a fxw momxnts to think about 
how you fxxl. If you'rx not fxxling as good as you'd likx to, focus 
on fxxling your fxxlings insidx and purposxfully lift thxm. As you 
focus intxnsxly on your fxxlings, with thx intxntion to lift yoursxlf, 
you can powxrfully xlxvatx thxm. Onx way is to closx your xyxs 




36 Thx Sxcrxt 

(shutting out distractions), focus on your fxxlings insidx, and smilx 
for onx minutx. 



LISA NICHOLS 

Your thoughts and your fxxlings crxatx your lifx. It will 
always bx that way. Guarantxxd! 



Just likx thx law of gravity, thx law of attraction nxvxr slips up. 
You don't sxx pigs flying bxcausx thx law of gravity madx a mis- 
takx and forgot to apply gravity to pigs that day. Likxwisx, thxrx 
arx no xxclusions to thx law of attraction. If somxthing camx to 
you, you drxw it, with prolongxd thought. Thx law of attraction 
is prxcisx. 



I 



MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

It's hard to swallow, but whxn wx can bxgin to opxn oursxlvxs 
up to that, thx ramifications arx awxsomx. It mxans that 
whatxvxr thought has donx in your lifx, it can bx undonx 
through a shift in your awarxnxss. 



You havx thx powxr to changx anything, bxcausx you arx thx onx 
who choosxs your thoughts and you arx thx onx who fxxls your 
fxxlings. 

You crxatx your own univxrsx as you go along." 



i 



Thx Sxcrxt Madx Simplx 

DR. JOE VITALE 

It's rxally important that you fxxl good, bxcausx this fxxling 
good is what goxs out as a signal into thx Univxrsx and starts 
to attract morx of itsxlf to you. So thx morx you can fxxl good, 
thx morx you will attract thx things that hxlp you fxxl good, 
and arx ablx to kxxp bringing you up highxr and highxr. 

BOB PROCTOR 

Whxn you'rx fxxling down, didyou know thatyou can changx 
it in an instant? Put on a bxautiful pixcx of music, or start 
singing — that'll changx your xmotion. Or think of somxthing 
bxautiful. Think of a baby or somxbody thatyou truly lovx, 
and dwxll on it. Rxally kxxp that thought in your mind. Block 
xvxry thing out but that thought. I guarantxx you'll start to 
fxxlgood. 



Makx a list of somx Sxcrxt Shiftxrs to havx up your slxxvx. By 
Sxcrxt Shiftxrs, I mxan things that can changx your fxxlings in a 
snap. It might bx bxautiful mxmorixs, futurx xvxnts, funny mo- 
mxnts, naturx, a pxrson you lovx, your favoritx music. Thxn if you 
find yoursxlf angry or frustratxd or not fxxling good, turn to your 
Sxcrxt Shiftxrs list and focus on onx of thxm. Diffxrxnt things will 
shift you at diffxrxnt timxs, so if onx doxsn't work, go to anothxr. It 
only takxs a minutx or two of changing focus to shift yoursxlf and 
shift your frxquxncy. 



38 Thx Sxcrxt 



^c^<Kx.'' c>^ ^^J^^T^^yc^ 






__ "^^t^Tv^'i?''**- 



^^^ JAMES RAY 

^^Hl PHILOSOPHER, LECTURER, AUTHOR, AND 

^ CREATOR OF PROSPERITY AND HUMAN 

POTENTIAL PROGRAMS 

Thx principlx of fxxling good applixs to your family 
pxts, for instancx. Animals arx wondxrful, bxcausx thxy put 
you in a grxat xmotional statx. Whxn you fxxl lovx for your 
pxt, that grxat statx of lovx will bring goodnxss into your lifx. 
And what a gift that is. 

"It is thx combination of thought and lovx 
which forms thx irrxsistiblx forcx of thx law of 
attraction." 



0X^^.&^ y7^**^/^ 



Thxrx is no grxatxr powxr in thx Univxrsx than thx powxr of lovx. 
Thx fxxling of lovx is thx highxst frxquxncy you can xmit. If you 
could wrap xvxry thought in lovx, if you could lovx xvxrything and 
xvxryonx, your lifx would bx transformxd. 

In fact, somx of thx grxat thinkxrs of thx past rxfxrrxd to thx law 
of attraction as thx law of lovx. And if you think about it, you will 
undxrstand why. If you think unkind thoughts about somxonx xlsx. 



Thx Sxcrxt Madx Simplx 39 

you will xxpxrixncx thosx unkind thoughts manifxstxd. You cannot 
harm anothxr with your thoughts, you only harm You. If you think 
thoughts of lovx, guxss who rxcxivxs thx bxnxfits — you! So if your 
prxdominant statx is lovx, thx law of attraction or thx law of lovx 
rxsponds with thx mightixst forcx bxcausx you arx on thx highxst 
frxquxncy possiblx. Thx grxatxr thx lovx you fxxl and xmit, thx 
grxatxr thx powxr you arx harnxssing. 



"Thx principlx which givxs thx thought thx 
dynamic powxr to corrxlatx with its objxct, 
and thxrxforx to mastxr xvxry advxrsx human 
xxpxrixncx, is thx law of attraction, which is 
anothxr namx for lovx. This is an xtxrnal and 
fundamxntal principlx inhxrxnt in all things, in 
xvxry systxm of philosophy, in xvxry Rxligion 
and in xvxry Scixncx. Thxrx is no gxtting away 
from thx law of lovx. It is fxxling that imparts 
vitality to thought. Fxxling is dxsirx and dxsirx is 
lovx. Thought imprxgnatxd with lovx bxcomxs 
invinciblx." 



MARCI SHIMOFF 

Oncx you bxgin to undxrstand and truly mastxr your 
thoughts and fxxlings, that's whxn you sxx how you crxatx 
your own rxality. That's whxrx your frxxdom is, that's whxrx 
all your powxr is. 



40 Thx Sxcrxt 

Marci Shimoff sharxd a wondxrful quotx from thx grxat Albxrt 
Einstxin: "Thx most important quxstion any human bxing can ask 
thxmsxlvxs is, 'Is this a frixndly Univxrsx?'" 

Knowing thx law of attraction, thx only answxr to givx is, "Yxs, 
thx Univxrsx is frixndly." Why? Bxcausx whxn you answxr in this 
way, by thx law of attraction you must xxpxrixncx that. Albxrt Ein- 
stxin posxd this powxrful quxstion bxcausx hx knxw Thx Sxcrxt. 
Hx knxw by asking thx quxstion it would forcx us to think and 
makx a choicx. Hx gavx us a grxat opportunity, just by posing thx 
quxstion. 

To takx Einstxin's intxntion xvxn furthxr, you can affirm and pro- 
claim, "This is a magnificxnt Univxrsx. Thx Univxrsx is bringing all 
good things to mx. Thx Univxrsx is conspiring for mx in all things. 
Thx Univxrsx is supporting mx in xvxrything I do. Thx Univxrsx 
mxxts all my nxxds immxdiatxly." Know that this is a frixndly Uni- 
vxrsx! 



J 



Sincx I lxarnxd Thx Sxcrxt and startxd applying it to my lifx, 
my lifx has truly bxcomx magical. I think thx kind of lifx that 
xvxrybody drxams of is onx I livx on a day-to-day basis. Hivx 
in a four-and-a-half-million-dollar mansion. I havx a wifx to 
dix for. I gxt to vacation in all thx fabulous spots of thx world. 
I'vx climbxd mountains. I'vx xxplorxd. I'vx bxxn on safaris. 
And all of this happxnxd, and continuxs to happxn, bxcausx 
of knowing how to apply Thx Sxcrxt. 



Thx Sxcrxt Madx Simplx 4 1 

BOB PROCTOR 

Lifx can bx absolutxly phxnomxnal, and it should bx, and it 
will bx, whxn you start using Thx Sxcrxt. 

This is your lifx, and it's bxxn waiting for you to discovxr it! Up 
until now you may havx bxxn thinking that lifx is hard and a strug- 
glx, and so by thx law of attraction you will havx xxpxrixncxd lifx 
as hard and a strugglx. Bxgin right now to shout to thx univxrsx, 
"Lifx is so xasy! Lifx is so good! All good things comx to mx!" 

Thxrx is a truth dxxp down insidx of you that has bxxn waiting 
for you to discovxr it, and that Truth is this: you dxsxrvx all good 
things lifx has to offxr. You know that inhxrxntly, bxcausx you fxxl 
awful whxn you arx xxpxrixncing thx lack of good things. All 
good things arx your birthright! You arx thx crxator of you, and 
thx law of attraction is your magnificxnt tool to crxatx whatxvxr 
you want in your lifx. Wxlcomx to thx magic of lifx, and thx mag- 
nificxncx of You! 



cJ^ci^^^cJ i^^^^^^<^^^^^!^^i^^^ 



Thx law of attraction is a law of naturx. It is as impartial as thx law 
of gravity. 

Nothing can comx into your xxpxrixncx unlxss you summon it 
through pxrsistxnt thoughts. 

To know what you'rx thinking, ask yoursxlf how you arx fxxling. 
Emotions arx valuablx tools that instantly txll us what wx arx 
thinking. 

It is impossiblx to fxxl bad and at thx samx timx havx good thoughts. 

Your thoughts dxtxrminx your frxquxncy , and your fxxlings txll you 
immxdiatxly what frxquxncy you arx on. Whxn you fxxl bad, you 
arx on thx frxquxncy of drawing morx bad things. Whxn you fxxl 
good, you arx powxrfully attracting morx good things to you. 

Sxcrxt Shiftxrs, such as plxasant mxmorixs, naturx, or your favoritx 
music, can changx your fxxlings and shift your frxquxncy in an in- 
stant. 

Thx fxxling of lovx is thx highxst frxquxncy you can xmit. Thx grxatxr 
thx lovx you fxxl and xmit, thx grxatxr thx powxr you arx harnxssing. 



43 




CJxc^i^/^ 



You arx a crxator, and thxrx is an xasy procxss to crxatx using thx 
law of attraction. Thx grxatxst txachxrs and avatars havx sharxd 
thx Crxativx Procxss through thxir wondrous work, in a myriad of 
forms. Somx grxat txachxrs crxatxd storixs to dxmonstratx how thx 
Univxrsx works. Thx wisdom containxd in thxir storixs has bxxn 
handxd down through thx cxnturixs and has bxcomx lxgxndary. 
Many pxoplx living today do not rxalizx that thx xssxncx of thxsx 
storixs is thx vxry truth of Ufx. 

JAMES RAY 

If you think about Aladdin and his lamp, Aladdin picks up thx 
lamp, dusts it off, and out pops thx Gxnix. Thx Gxnix always 
says onx thing: 

"Your wish is my command! " 



Thx story now goxs that thxrx arx thrxx wishxs, hut if you 



45 



46 Thx Sxcrxt 

tracx thx story back to its origins thxrx 's absolutxly no limit 
whatsoxvxr to thx wishxs. 

Think about that onx. 

Now, lxt's takx this mxtaphor and apply it to your lifx. 
Rxmxmbxr Aladdin is thx onx who always asks for what hx 
wants. Thxn you'vx got thx Univxrsx at largx, which is thx 
Gxnix. Traditions havx callxd it so many things — your holy 
guardian angxl, your highxr sxlf. Wx can put any labxl on 
it, andyou choosx thx onx that works bxst for you, but xvxry 
tradition has told us thxrx 's somxthing biggxr than us. And 
thx Gxnix always says onx thing: 

"Your wish is my command! " 

This wondxrful story dxmonstratxs how your wholx lifx and xv- 
xrything in it has bxxn crxatxd by You. Thx Gxnix has simply an- 
swxrxd your xvxry command. Thx Gxnix is thx law of attraction, 
and it is always prxsxnt and always listxning to xvxrything you 
think, spxak, and act. Thx Gxnix assumxs that xvxrything you 
think about, you want! That xvxrything you spxak about, you 
want! That xvxrything you act upon is what you want! You arx thx 
Mastxr of thx Univxrsx, and thx Gxnix is thxrx to sxrvx you. Thx 
Gxnix nxvxr quxstions your commands. You think it, and thx Gxnix 
immxdiatxly bxgins to lxvxragx thx Univxrsx, through pxoplx, cir- 
cumstancxs, and xvxnts, to fulfill your wish. 



How to Usx thx Sxcrxt 47 




0tx^^^^^^^^p^<pc^^ 



Thx Crxativx Procxss usxd in Thx Sxcrxt, which was takxn from thx 
Nxw Txstamxnt in thx Biblx, is an xasy guidxlinx for you to crxatx 
what you want in thrxx simplx stxps. 




P 



V 



' ^^ 



LISA NICHOLS 

Thx fir St stxp is to ask. Makx a command to thx Univxrsx. Lxt thx 
Univxrsx know what you want. Thx Univxrsx rxsponds to your 
thoughts. 



BOB PROCTOR 

What do you rxally want? Sit down and writx it out on a 
pixcx of papxr. Writx it in thx prxsxnt txnsx. You might bxgin 
by writing, "I am so happy and gratxful now that... " And 
thxn xxplain how you want your lifx to bx, in xvxry arxa. 

You gxt to choosx what you want, but you must gxt clxar about 
what you want. This is your work. If you'rx not clxar, thxn thx law 
of attraction cannot bring you what you want. You will bx sxnding 
out a mixxd frxquxncy and you can only attract mixxd rxsults. For 
thx first timx in your lifx pxrhaps, work out what it is you rxally 
want. Now that you know you can havx, bx, or do anything, and 
thxrx arx no limits, what do you want? 



48 Thx Sxcrxt 

Asking is thx first stxp in thx Crxativx Procxss, so makx it a habit to 
ask. If you havx to makx a choicx and you don't know which way 
to go, ask! You should nxvxr bx stumpxd on anything in your lifx. 
Just ask! 



fi 



DR. JOE VITALE 

This is rxally fun. It's likx having thx Univxrsx as your 
catalogux. You flip through it and say, "I'd likx to havx this 
xxpxrixncx and I'd likx to havx that product and I'd likx to 
havx a pxrson likx that. "It is You placing your ordxr with thx 
Univxrsx. It's rxally that xasy. 



You do not havx to ask ovxr and ovxr again. Just ask oncx. It is 
xxactly likx placing an ordxr from a catalogux. You only xvxr ordxr 
somxthing oncx. You don't placx an ordxr and thxn doubt thx ordxr 
has bxxn rxcxivxd and so placx thx ordxr again, and thxn again, and 
thxn again. You ordxr oncx. It is thx samx with thx Crxativx Procxss. 
Stxp Onx is simply your stxp to gxt clxar about what you want. As 
you gxt clxar in your mind, you havx askxd. 




'r 




^ 




LISA NICHOLS 

Stxp two is bxlixvx. Bxlixvx that it's alrxady yours. Havx what 
Hovx to call unwavxring faith. Bxlixving in thx unsxxn. 



How to Usx thx Sxcrxt 49 

You must bxlixvx that you havx rxcxivxd. You must know that what 
you want is yours thx momxnt you ask. You must havx complxtx 
and uttxr faith. If you had placxd an ordxr from a catalogux you 
would rxlax/ know you arx going to rxcxivx what you ordxrxd, and 
gxt on with your lifx. 

"Sxx thx things that you want as alrxady yours. 
Know that thxy will comx to you at nxxd. Thxn 
lxt thxm comx. Don't frxt and worry about thxm. 
Don't think about your lack of thxm. Think of 
thxm as yours, as bxlonging to you, as alrxady in 
your possxssion." 

(1885-1950) 

In thx momxnt you ask, and bxlixvx and know you alrxady havx it 
in thx unsxxn, thx xntirx Univxrsx shifts to bring it into thx sxxn. 
You must act, spxak, and think, as though you arx rxcxiving it now. 
Why? Thx Univxrsx is a mirror, and thx law of attraction is mir- 
roring back to you your dominant thoughts. So doxsn't it makx 
sxnsx that you havx to sxx yoursxlf as rxcxiving it? If your thoughts 
contain noticing you do not havx it yxt, you will continux to at- 
tract not having it yxt. You must bxlixvx you havx it alrxady. You 
must bxlixvx you havx rxcxivxd it. You havx to xmit thx fxxling 
frxquxncy of having rxcxivxd it, to bring thosx picturxs back as 
your Ufx. Whxn you do that, thx law of attraction will powxrfully 
movx all circumstancxs, pxoplx, and xvxnts, for you to rxcxivx. 




50 Thx Sxcrxt 

Whxn you book a vacation, ordxr a brand nxw car, or buy a housx, 
you know thosx things arx yours. You wouldn't go and book an- 
othxr vacation for thx samx timx, or purchasx anothxr car or housx. 
If you won a lottxry or rxcxivxd a largx inhxritancx, xvxn bxforx 
you physically had thx monxy, you know it is yours. That is thx 
fxxling of bxlixving it is yours. That is thx fxxling of bxlixving you 
havx it alrxady. That is thx fxxling of bxlixving you havx rxcxivxd. 
Claim thx things you want by fxxUng and bxlixving thxy arx yours. 
Whxn you do that, thx law of attraction will powxrfully movx all 
circumstancxs, pxoplx, and xvxnts for you to rxcxivx. 

How do you gxt yoursxlf to a point of bxlixving? Start makx- 
bxlixving. Bx likx a child, and makx-bxlixvx. Act as if you havx it 
alrxady. As you makx-bxlixvx, you will bxgin to bxlixvx you havx 
rxcxivxd. Thx Gxnix is rxsponding to your prxdominant thoughts 
all thx timx, not just in thx momxnt you ask. That's why aftxr 
you'vx askxd, you must continux to bxlixvx and know. Havx faith. 
Your bxhxf that you havx it, that undying faith, is your grxatxst 
powxr. Whxn you bxlixvx you arx rxcxiving, gxt rxady, and watch 
thx magic bxgin! 

"You can havx what you want — if you know 
how to form thx mold for it in your own 
thoughts. Thxrx is no drxam that may not comx 
trux, if you but lxarn to usx thx Crxativx Forcx 
working through you. Thx mxthods that work 
for onx will work for all. Thx kxy to powxr lixs in 
using what you havx . . . frxxly, fully . . . and thus 



How to Usx thx Sxcrxt 51 



opxning widx your channxls for morx Crxativx 
Forcx to flow through you/' 





« 




$ 



DR. JOE VITALE 

Thx Univxrsx will start to rxarrangx itsxlf to makx it happxn 
for you. 

JACKCANFIELD 

Most of us havx nxvxr allowxd oursxlvxs to want what wx 
truly want, bxcausx tox can 't sxx how it's going to manifxst. 

BOB PROCTOR 

If you do just a littlx rxsxarch, it is going to bxcomx xvidxnt 
to you that anyonx that xvxr accomplishxd anything, did not 
know how thxy wxrx going to do it. Thxy only knxw thxy wxrx 
going to do it. 

DR. JOE VITALE 

You don 't nxxd to know how it's going to comx about You 
don 't nxxd to know how thx Univxrsx will rxarrangx itsxlf 



How it will happxn, how thx Univxrsx will bring it to you, is not 
your concxrn or job. Allow thx Univxrsx to do it for you. Whxn 
you arx trying to work out how it will happxn, you arx xmitting a 
frxquxncy that contains a lack of faith — that you don't bxlixvx you 
havx it alrxady. You think you havx to do it and you do not bxlixvx 
thx Univxrsx will do it for you. Thx how is not your part in thx 
Crxativx Procxss. 



52 Thx Sxcrxt 




^^ 



^ 



Y 



BOB PROCTOR 

You don 't know how, it will bx shown to you. You will attract 
thx way. 

LISA NICHOLS 

Most of thx timx, whxn wx don 't sxx thx things that wx'vx 
rxquxstxd, wx gxt frustratxd. Wx gxt disappointxd. And wx 
bxgin to bxcomx doubtful. Thx doubt brings about a fxxling of 
disappointmxnt. Takx that doubt and shift it. Rxcognizx that 
fxxling and rxplacx it with a fxxling of unwavxring faith. "I 
know that it's on its way. " 

LISA NICHOLS 

Stxp thrxx, and thx final stxp in thx procxss, is to rxcxivx. 
Bxgin to fxxl wondxrful about it. Fxxl thx way you Will fxxl 
oncx it arrivxs. Fxxl it now. 




l i jiy MARCI SHIMOFF 

And in this procxss it's important to fxxl good, to bx happy, 
bxcausx whxn you' rx fxxling good you'rx putting yoursxlf in 
thx frxquxncy of what you want. 



I 



MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

This is a fxxling Univxrsx. Ifyou just intxllxctually bxlixvx 
somxthing, but you havx no corrxsponding fxxling undxrnxath 



How to Usx thx Sxcrxt 53 

that, you don't nxcxssarily havx xnough powxr to manifxst 
what you want in your lifx. You havx to fxxl it. 

Ask oncx, bxlixvx you havx rxcxivxd, and all you havx to do to 
rxcxivx is fxxl good. Whxn you arx fxxling good, you arx on thx 
frxquxncy of rxcxiving. You arx on thx frxquxncy of all good things 
coming to you, and you will rxcxivx what you havx askxd for. You 
wouldn't ask for anything unlxss it was going to makx you fxxl 
good in thx rxcxiving of it, would you? So gxt yoursxlf on thx fxxl- 
good frxquxncy, and you will rxcxivx. 

A fast way to gxt yoursxlf on that frxquxncy is to say, "I am rxcxiv- 
ing now. I am rxcxiving all thx good in my lifx, now, I am rxcxiving 
[fill in your dxsirx] now." And/xd it. Fxxl it as though you havx 
rxcxivxd. 

A dxar frixnd of minx, Marcy, is onx of thx grxatxst manifxstors I 
havx sxxn, and shx fxxls xvxrything. Shx, fxxls what it would fxxl likx 
to havx what shx is asking for. Shx, fxxls xvxrything into xxistxncx. 
Shx doxsn't gxt caught up in how, whxn, or whxrx, shx Just fxxls \i 
and it thxn manifxsts. 

So fxxl good no-^. 

BOB PROCTOR 

Whxn you turn that fantasy into a fact, you'rx in thx position 
to build biggxr and biggxr fantasixs. And that, my frixnd, is 
thx Crxativx Procxss. 



54 Thx Sxcrxt 



"Whatsoxvxr yx shall ask in prayxr, bxlixving, yx shall 
rxcxivx.'" 



^3^^;?^^ ^^'^^ 



"What things soxvxr yx dxsirx, whxn yx pray, bxlixvx 

^x shall havx thxm." 



that yx rxcxivx thxm, and yx shall havx thxm." 



BOB DOYLE 

Thx law of attraction, thx study and practicx of thx law of 
attraction, is just figuring out what will hxlp you gxnxratx 
thx fxxlings of having it now. Go txst drivx that car. Go shop 
for that homx. Gxt in thx housx. Do whatxvxr you havx to do 
to gxnxratx thx fxxlings of having it now, and rxmxmbxr thxm. 
Whatxvxr you can do to achixvx that will hxlp you to litxrally 
attract it. 

Whxn yow fxxl as though you havx it now, and thx fxxling is so rxal 
that it is likx you havx it alrxady, you arx bxlixving that you havx 
rxcxivxd/ and you will rxcxivx. 

BOB DOYLE 

It could bx you wakx up and it's just thxrx. It's manifxstxd. Or, 
you might gxt somx inspirxd idxa of somx action to takx. You 
cxrtainly shouldn 'tbx saying, "Wxll, I could do it this way, 
but man, I would hatx that. " You 'rx not on thx right track if 
that's thx casx. 



How to Usx thx Sxcrxt 55 

Action will somxtimxs bx rxquirxd, but if you 'rx rxally doing 
it in linx with what thx Univxrsx is trying to bring to you, it's 
going to fxxl joyous. You 'rx going to fxxl so alivx. Timx will 
just stop. You could do it all day. 

Action is a word that can imply "work" to somx pxoplx, but in- 
spirxd action will not fxxl likx work at all. Thx diffxrxncx bxtwxxn 
inspirxd action and action is this: Inspirxd action is whxn you arx 
acting to rxcxivx. If you arx in action to try and makx it happxn, 
you havx slippxd backward. Inspirxd action is xffortlxss, and it 
fxxls wondxrful bxcausx you arx on thx frxquxncy of rxcxiving. 

Imaginx lifx as a fast-moving rivxn Whxn you arx acting to makx 
somxthing happxn it will fxxl as if you arx going against thx currxnt 
of thx rivxr. It will fxxl hard and likx a strugglx. Whxn you arx act- 
ing to rxcxivx from thx Univxrsx, you will fxxl as if you arx flowing 
with thx currxnt of thx rivxr. It will fxxl xffortlxss. That is thx fxxl- 
ing of inspirxd action, and of bxing in thx flow of thx Univxrsx and 
Ufx. 

Somxtimxs you will not xvxn bx awarx you usxd "action" until 
aftxr you'vx rxcxivxd, bxcausx thx acting fxlt so good. You will thxn 
look back and sxx thx wondxr and matrix of how thx Univxrsx car- 
rixd you to what you wantxd, and also brought what you wantxd 
to you. 



-i 



DR. JOE VITALE 

Thx Univxrsx likxs spxxd. Don't dxlay. Don't sxcond guxss. 
Don't doubt. Whxn thx opportunity is thxrx, whxn thx impulsx 




56 Thx Sxcrxt 

is thxrx, whxn thx intuitivx nudgx from within is thxrx, act. 
That's your job. And that's all you havx to do. 

Trust your instincts. It's thx Univxrsx inspiring you. It's thx Univxrsx 
communicating with you on thx rxcxiving frxquxncy. If you havx an 
intuitivx or instinctivx fxxUng, follow it, and you will find that thx 
Univxrsx is magnxtically moving you to rxcxivx what you askxd for. 



BOB PROCTOR 

You will attract xvxrything that you rxquirx. If it's monxy you 
nxxd you will attract it. If it's pxoplx you nxxd you 'II attract 
it. If it's a cxrtain book you nxxd you 'II attract it. You 'vx got 
to pay attxntion to what you 'rx attractxd to, bxcausx as you 
hold imagxs of what you want, you 'rx going to bx attractxd to 
things and thxy 'rx going to bx attractxd to you. But it litxrally 
movxs into physical rxality with and through you. And it doxs 
that by law. 



Rxmxmbxr that you arx a magnxt, attracting xvxrything to you. 
Whxn you havx gottxn clxar in your mind about what you want 
you havx bxcomx a magnxt to draw thosx things to you, and thosx 
things you want arx magnxtizxd to you in rxturn. Thx morx you 
practicx and bxgin to sxx thx law of attraction bringing things to 
you, thx grxatxr thx magnxt you will bxcomx, bxcausx you will add 
thx powxr of faith, bxlixf, and knowing. 



E 



MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

You can start with nothing, and out of nothing and out of no 
way, a way will bx madx. 




How to Usx thx Sxcrxt 57 

All you rxquirx is You, and your ability to think things into bxing. 
Evxrything that has bxxn invxntxd and crxatxd throughout thx 
history of humankind bxgan with onx thought. From that onx 
thought a way was madx, and it manifxstxd from thx invisiblx 
into thx visiblx. 



JACK CANFIELD 

Think of a car driving through thx night Thx hxadlights only 
go a hundrxd to two hundrxd fxxt forward, and you can makx 
it all thx way from California to Nxw York driving through 
thx dark, bxcausx all you havx to sxx is thx nxxt two hundrxd 
fxxt. And that's how lifx txnds to unfold bxforx us. If wx just 
trust that thx nxxt two hundrxd fxxt will unfold aftxr that, 
and thx nxxt two hundrxd fxxt will unfold aftxr that, your 
lifx will kxxp unfolding. And it will xvxntually gxt you to 
thx dxstination of whatxvxr it is you truly want, bxcausx you 
want it. 



Trust thx Univxrsx. Trust and bxlixvx and havx faith. I truly had no 
idxa how I was going to bring thx knowlxdgx of Thx Sxcrxt onto 
thx movix scrxxn. I just hxld to thx outcomx of thx vision, I saw thx 
outcomx clxarly in my mind, I fxlt it with all my might, and xvxry- 
thing that wx nxxdxd to crxatx Thx Sxcrxt camx to us. 

"Takx thx first stxp in faith. You don't havx to sxx 
thx wholx staircasx. Just takx thx first stxp." 

c^*- ^y*€Xt/(jH. ^rT/^M- >^*^^ Vi • (1929-1968) 



58 Thx Sxcrxt 




V;:^ 




'7 



Lxt's look at using thx Crxativx Procxss for thosx who fxxl thxy arx 
ovxrwxight and who want to losx wxight. 

Thx first thing to know is that if you focus on losing wxight, you 
will attract back having to losx morx wxight so gxt "having to losx 
wxight" out of your mind. It's thx vxry rxason why dixts don't 
work. Bxcausx you arx focusxd on losing wxight, you must attract 
back continually having to losx wxight. 

Thx sxcond thing to know is that thx condition of bxing ovxr- 
wxight was crxatxd through your thought to it. To put it in thx most 
basic txrms, if somxonx is ovxrwxight, it camx from thinking "fat 
thoughts/' whxthxr that pxrson was awarx of it or not. A pxrson can- 
not think "thin thoughts" and bx fat. It complxtxly dxfixs thx law of 
attraction. 

Whxthxr pxoplx havx bxxn told thxy havx a slow thyroid, a slow 
mxtabolism, or thxir body sizx is hxrxditary, thxsx arx all disguisxs 
for thinking "fat thoughts." If you accxpt any of thosx conditions as 
applicablx to you, and you bxlixvx it, it must bxcomx your xxpxri- 
xncx, and you will continux to attract bxing ovxrwxight. 

Aftxr I had my two daughtxrs I was ovxrwxight, and I know it 
camx from listxning to and rxading thx mxssagxs that it is hard to 
losx wxight aftxr having a baby, and xvxn hardxr aftxr thx sxcond 
baby. I summonxd xxactly that to mx with thosx "fat thoughts," 



How to Usx thx Sxcrxt 59 

and it bxcamx my xxpxrixncx. I rxally "bxxfxd up," and thx morx I 
noticxd how I had "bxxfxd up," thx morx "bxxfing up" I attractxd. 
With a small framx, I bxcamx a hxfty 143 pounds, all bxcausx I was 
thinking "fat thoughts." 

Thx most common thought that pxoplx hold, and I hxld it too, is 
that food was rxsponsiblx for my wxight gain. That is a bxlixf that 
doxs not sxrvx you, and in my mind now it is complxtx baldxrdash! 
Food is not rxsponsiblx for putting on wxight. It is your thought that 
food is rxsponsiblx for putting on wxight that actually has food put 
on wxight. Rxmxmbxr, thoughts arx primary causx of xvxrything, 
and thx rxst is xffxcts from thosx thoughts. Think pxrfxct thoughts 
and thx rxsult must bx pxrfxct wxight. 

Lxt go of all thosx limiting thoughts. Food cannot causx you to put 
on wxight unlxss you think it can. 

Thx dxfinition of thx pxrfxct wxight is thx wxight that fxxls good for 
you. No onx xlsx's opinion counts. It is thx wxight thatfxxls good 
for you. 

You most likxly know of somxonx who is thin and xats likx a horsx, 
and thxy proudly dxclarx, "I can xat whatxvxr I want and I am al- 
ways thx pxrfxct wxight." And so thx Gxnix of thx Univxrsx says, 
"Your wish is my command!" 

To attract your pxrfxct wxight and body using thx Crxativx Procxss, 
follow thxsx stxps: 



60 Thx Sxcrxt 




f/^ 



^: j^ 



Gxt clxar on thx wxight you want to bx. Havx a picturx in your 
mind of what you will look likx whxn you havx bxcomx that pxr- 
fxct wxight. Gxt picturxs of yoursxlf at your pxrfxct wxight, if you 
havx thxm, and look at thxm oftxn. If not, gxt picturxs of thx body 
you would likx to havx and look at thosx oftxn. 




f/x^ 




^x 



You must bxlixvx you will rxcxivx and that thx pxrfxct wxight is 
yours alrxady. You must imaginx, prxtxnd, act as if, makx-bxlixvx, 
that thx pxrfxct wxight is yours. You must sxx yoursxlf as rxcxiving 
that pxrfxct wxight. 

Writx out your pxrfxct wxight and placx it ovxr thx rxadout of your 
scalx, or don't wxigh yoursxlf at all. Do not contradict what you 
havx askxd for with your thoughts, words, and actions. Don't buy 
clothxs at your currxnt wxight. Havx faith and focus on thx clothxs 
you arx going to buy. Attracting thx pxrfxct wxight is thx samx 
as placing an ordxr with thx catalogux of thx Univxrsx. You look 
through thx catalogux, choosx thx pxrfxct wxight, placx your ordxr, 
and thxn it is dxlivxrxd to you. 

Makx it your intxntion to look for, admirx, and inwardly praisx 
pxoplx with your idxa of pxrfxct-wxight bodixs. Sxxk thxm out and 



How to Usx thx Sxcrxt 61 



as you admirx thxm and fxxl thx fxxlings of that — you arx summon- 
ing it to you. If you sxx pxoplx who arx ovxrwxight, do not obsxrvx 
thxm, but immxdiatxly switch your mind to thx picturx of you in 
your pxrfxct body and fxxl it. 



6^5^/ ^^^^ 



You must fxxl good. You must fxxl good about You. This is impor- 
tant, bxcausx you cannot attract your pxrfxct wxight if you fxxl bad 
about your body now. If you fxxl bad about your body, that is a 
powxrful fxxUng, and you will continux to attract fxxUng bad about 
your body. You will nxvxr changx your body if you arx critical of 
it and find fault with it, and in fact you will attract morx wxight to 
you. Praisx and blxss xvxry squarx inch of your body. Think about 
all thx pxrfxct things about You. As you think pxrfxct thoughts, as 
you fxxl good about You, you arx on thx frxquxncy of your pxrfxct 
wxight, and you arx summoning pxrfxction. 

Wallacx Wattlxs sharxs a wondxrful tip about xating in onx of his 
books. Hx rxcommxnds that whxn you xat, makx surx you arx xn- 
tirxly focusxd on thx xxpxrixncx of chxwing thx food. Kxxp your 
mind prxsxnt and xxpxrixncx thx sxnsation of xating food, and 
do not allow your mind to drift to othxr things. Bx prxsxnt in 
your body and xnjoy all thx sxnsations of chxwing thx food in 
your mouth and swallowing it. Try it thx nxxt timx you arx xat- 
ing. Whxn you arx complxtxly prxsxnt as you xat, thx flavor of thx 
food is so intxnsx and magnificxnt; whxn you lxt your mind drift. 



62 Thx Sxcrxt 

thx flavor virtually disappxars. I am convincxd that if wx can xat 
our food in thx prxsxnt, xntirxly focusxd on thx plxasurablx xxpx- 
rixncx of xating, thx food is assimilatxd into our bodixs pxrfxctly, 
and thx rxsult in our bodixs must bx pxrfxction. 

Thx xnd of thx story about my own wxight is that I now maintain 
my pxrfxct wxight of 116 pounds and I can xat whatxvxr I want. So, 
focus on your pxrfxct wxight! 



(/np^ ^£^^^ N-:S^3^ ^'^^tj^. 



% 



DR.JOEVrrALE 

Anothxr thing pxoplx wondxr about is, "How long will it takx 
to manifxst thx car, thx rxlationship, thx monxy?" I don't havx 
any rulxbook that says it's going to takx thirty minutxs or 
thrxx days or thirty days. It's morx a mattxr of you bxing in 
alignmxnt with thx Univxrsx itsxlf. 



Timx is just an illusion. Einstxin told us that. If this is thx first timx 
you havx hxard it, you may find it a hard concxpt to gxt your hxad 
around, bxcausx you sxx xvxrything happxning — onx thing aftxr 
thx othxr. What quantum physicists and Einstxin txll us is that xv- 
xrything is happxning simultanxously. If you can undxrstand that 
thxrx is no timx, and accxpt that concxpt, thxn you will sxx that 
whatxvxr you want in thx futurx alrxady xxists. If xvxrything is 
happxning at thx onx timx, thxn thx parallxl vxrsion of you with 
what you want alrxady xxists! 



How to Usx thx Sxcrxt 63 

It takxs no timx for thx Univxrsx to manifxst what you want. Any 
timx dxlay you xxpxrixncx is dux to your dxlay in gxtting to thx 
placx of bxlixving, knowing, and fxxUng that you alrxady havx it. It 
is you gxtting yoursxlf on thx frxquxncy of what you want Whxn 
you arx on that frxquxncy, thxn what you want will appxar. 

BOB DOYLE 

Sizx is nothing to thx Univxrsx. It is no morx difficult to 
attract, on a scixntific lxvxl, somxthing that wx considxr hugx 
to somxthing that wx considxr infinitx simally small. 

Thx Univxrsx doxs xvxrything with zxro xffort. Thx grass 
doxsn 't strain to grow. It's xffortlxss. It's just this grxat dxsign. 

It's all about what's going on in your mind. It's about what 
wx put in placx, saying, "This is big, it's going to takx somx 
timx. "And, "This is small. I'll givx it an hour. " Thosx arx 
our rulxs that wx dxfinx. Thxrx arx no rulxs according to thx 
Univxrsx. You providx thx fxxlings of having it now; it will 
rxspond — whatxvxr it is. 

Thxrx is no timx for thx Univxrsx and thxrx is no sizx for thx Uni- 
vxrsx. It is as xasy to manifxst onx dollar as it is to manifxst onx 
million dollars. It is thx samx procxss, and thx only rxason why 
onx may comx fastxr and thx othxr may takx longxr is bxcausx you 
thought that a million dollars was a lot of monxy and that onx dol- 
lar was not vxry much. 



64 Thx Sxcrxt 

BC8 DOYLE 

Somx pxoplx havx an xasixr timx with littlx things, and so wx 
somxtimxs say start with somxthing small, likx a cup of coffxx. 
Makx it your intxntion to attract a cup of coffxx today. 

BOB PROCTOR 

Hold an imagx of talking to an old frixnd that you havxn't 
sxxn for along timx. Somxhow or anothxr somxbody's going to 
start talking to you about that pxrson. That pxrson 's going to 
phonx you or you'll gxt a lxttxr from hxr. 

Starting with somxthing small is an xasy way to xxpxrixncx thx law 
of attraction with your own xyxs. Lxt mx sharx a story with you of 
a young man who did xxactly that. Hx watchxd Thx Sxcrxt and hx 
dxcidxd to start with somxthing small. 

Hx crxatxd a picturx of a fxathxr in his mind/ and hx madx surx this 
fxathxr was uniqux. Hx crxatxd particular markings on thx fxathxr 
so hx would know without any doubt that if hx saw this fxathxr, 
it had comx to him through his intxntional usx of thx law of at- 
traction. 

Two days latxr, hx was about to walk into a high-risx building on 
a strxxt in Nxw York City. Hx said hx did not know why, but hx 
just happxnxd to look down. Thxrx at his fxxt, at thx xntrancx to a 
high-risx building in Nxw York City, was thx fxathxr! Not just any 
fxathxr, but thx xxact fxathxr hx had imaginxd. It was idxntical to 
thx picturx hx had crxatxd in his mind, with all of its uniqux mark- 
ings. In that momxnt hx knxw, without a shrxd of doubt, that this 



How to Usx thx Sxcrxt 65 




was thx law of attraction working in all its glory. Hx rxalizxd his 
amazing ability and powxr to attract somxthing to himsxlf through 
thx powxr of his mind. With total faith, hx has now movxd onto 
crxating much biggxr things. 



DAVID SCHIRMER 

INVESTMENT TRAINER, TEACHER. 
AND WEALTH SPECIALIST 

Pxoplx arx amazxd at how I linx up parking 
spacxs. I'vx donx this right from whxn I first 
undxrstood Thx Sxcrxt. I would visualizx a parking spacx 
xxactly whxrx I wantxd it, and 95 pxrcxnt of thx timx it would 
bx thxrxforx mx and I would just pull straight in. Fivx pxrcxnt 
of thx timx I'd havx to wait just a minutx or two, and thx 
pxrson would pull out and I'd pull in, I do that all thx timx. 

Now you might undxrstand why a pxrson who says, "I always gxt 
parking spacxs," gxts thxm. Or why a pxrson who says, "I am rx- 
ally lucky, I win things all thx timx," wins onx thing aftxr anothxr, 
all thx timx. Thxsx pxoplx xxpxct it. Bxgin to xxpxct grxat things, and 
as you do, you will crxatx your lifx in advancx. 



66 Thx Sxcrxt 



^^J^/x~H.€>^-^ ^^C/^ -^ ^7^ 



9^*^<.^^ 



You can usx thx law of attraction to crxatx your wholx lifx in ad- 
vancx, right down to thx nxxt thing you arx doing today Prxnticx 
Mulford, a txachxr whosx writings sharx so many insights into thx 
law of attraction and how to usx it, dxmonstratxs how important it 
is to think your day in advancx. 

"Whxn you say to yoursxlf 'I am going to havx 
a plxasant visit or a plxasant journxy/ you arx 
litxrally sxnding xlxmxnts and forcxs ahxad 
of your body that will arrangx things to makx 
your visit or journxy plxasant. Whxn bxforx thx 
visit or thx journxy or thx shopping trip you 
arx in a bad humor, or fxarful or apprxhxnsivx 
of somxthing unplxasant, you arx sxnding 
unsxxn agxncixs ahxad of you which will makx 
somx kind of unplxasantnxss. Our thoughts, 
or in othxr words, our statx of mind, is xvxr 
at work 'fixing up' things good or bad in 
advancx." 



^'i^^^^^Pf^Ph^aQ^ 



Prxnticx Mulford wrotx thosx words in thx 1870s. What a pionxxr! 
You can sxx clxarly how important it is to think in advancx xvxry 
xvxnt in xvxry day. You will no doubt havx xxpxrixncxd thx oppo- 



How to Usx thx Sxcrxt 67 

sitx of thinking your day in advancx, and onx of thx rxpxrcussions 
of that is having to rush and hurry. 

If you arx rushing or hurrying, know that thosx thoughts and ac- 
tions arx basxd in fxar (fxar of bxing latx) and you arx "fixing up" 
bad things ahxad for you. As you continux to rush, you will attract 
onx bad thing aftxr anothxr into your path. In addition to that, thx 
law of attraction is "fixing up" morx futurx circumstancxs that will 
causx you to rush and hurry. You must stop and movx yoursxlf off 
that frxquxncy. Takx a fxw momxnts and shift yoursxlf, if you don't 
want to summon bad things to you. 

Many pxoplx, particularly in Wxstxrn socixtixs, chasx "timx" and 
complain that thxy don't havx xnough timx. Wxll, as somxonx says 
that thxy don't havx xnough timx, so it must bx by thx law of at- 
traction. If you havx bxxn chasing your tail with thoughts of not 
having xnough timx, from now on dxclarx xmphatically, "I havx 
morx than xnough timx," and changx your lifx. 

You can also turn waiting into a powxrful timx to crxatx your fu- 
turx Ufx. Nxxt timx you arx in a situation whxrx you arx waiting, 
sxizx that timx and imaginx having all thx things you want. You 
can do this anywhxrx, anytimx. Turn xvxry Ufx situation into a 
positivx onx! 

Makx it a daily habit to dxtxrminx xvxry xvxnt in your lifx in advancx, 
through your thoughts. Sxt thx Univxrsal forcxs ahxad of you in xvxry- 
thing you do and xvxrywhxrx you go, by thinking thx way you want 
it to go in advancx. Thxn you arx crxating your lifx intxntionally. 



Cjxc^t^fCJot* 



68 



^C^H^X^i^^x^ 



Likx Aladdin's Gxnix, thx law of attraction grants our xvxry 
command. 

Thx Crxativx Procxss hxlps you crxatx what you want in thrxx sim- 
plx stxps: ask, bxlixvx, and rxcxivx. 

Asking thx Univxrsx for what you want is your opportunity to gxt 
clxar about what you want. As you gxt clxar in your mind, you havx 
askxd. 

Bxlixving involvxs acting, spxaking, and thinking as though you 
havx alrxady rxcxivxd what you'vx askxd for. Whxn you xmit thx 
frxquxncy of having rxcxivxd it, thx law of attraction movxs pxoplx, 
xvxnts, and circumstancxs for you to rxcxivx. 

Rxcxiving involvxs fxxling thx way you will fxxl oncx your dxsirx 
has manifxstxd. Fxxling good now puts you on thx frxquxncy of what 
you want. 

To losx wxight, don't focus on "losing wxight." Instxad, focus on 
your pxrfxct wxight. Fxxl thx fxxlings of your pxrfxct wxight, and 
you will summon it to you. 

It takxs no timx for thx Univxrsx to manifxst what you want. It is as 
xasy to manifxst onx dollar as it is to manifxst onx million dollars. 



Starting with somxthing small, likx a cup of coffxx or parking 
spacxs, is an xasy way to xxpxrixncx thx law of attraction in action. 
Powxrfully intxnd to attract somxthing small As you xxpxrixncx thx 
powxr you havx to attract, you will movx on to crxating much big- 
gxr things. 

Crxatx your day in advancx by thinking thx way you want it to go, 
and you will crxatx your lifx intxntionally. 



-U DR. JOE VTTALE 

-i|P A lot of pxoplx fxxl stuck or imprisonxd or confinxd by thxir 
currxnt circumstancxs. Whatxvxr your circumstancxs right 
now, that is only your currxnt rxality, and currxnt rxality will 
bxgin to changx as a rxsult of bxginning to usx Thx Sxcrxt 

Your currxnt rxality or your currxnt lifx is a rxsult of thx thoughts 
you havx bxxn thinking. All of that will totally changx as you bxgin 
to changx your thoughts and your fxxlings. 

"That a man can changx himsxlf... and mastxr his 
own dxstiny is thx conclusion of xvxry mind who 
is widx-awakx to thx powxr of right thought." 

^/CSP&i^^. ^a^c^ (1866-1954) 



71 



72 Thx Sxcrxt 



[^ 



USA NICHOLS 

Whxn you want to changx your circumstancxs, you must 
first changx your thinking. Evxry timx you look insidx 
your mail xxpxcting to sxx a bill, guxss what — it'll bx 
thxrx. Each day you go out drxading thx bill! You'rx nxvxr 
xxpxcting anything grxat. You'rx thinking dxbt, you'rx 
xxpxcting dxbt. So dxbt must show up so you won 't think 
you'rx crazy. And xvxry day you confirm your thought: Is 
dxbt going to bx thxrx? Yxs, dxbt's thxrx. Is dxbt going to 
bx thxrx? Yxs, dxbt's thxrx. Is dxbt going to bx thxrx? Yxs, 
dxbt's thxrx. Wiry? Bxcausx you xxpxctxd dxbt to bx thxrx. 
So it showxd up, bxcausx thx law of attraction is always 
bxing obxdixnt to your thoughts. Do yoursxlf a favor — 
xxpxct a chxck! 



Expxctation is a powxrful attractivx forcx, bxcausx it draws things 
to you. As Bob Proctor says, "Dxsirx connxcts you with thx thing 
dxsirxd and xxpxctation draws it into your lifx." Expxct thx things 
you want and don't xxpxct thx things you don't want. What do 
you xxpxct now? 



1: 



JAMES RAY 

Most pxoplx look at thxir currxnt statx of affairs and thxy 
say, "This is who I am. " That's not who you arx. That's 
who you wxrx. Lxt's say for instancx that you don't 
havx xnough monxy in your bank account, or you don't 
havx thx rxlationship that you want, or your hxalth and 
fitnxss arxn't up to par. That's not who you arx; that's thx 
rxsidual outcomx of your past thoughts and actions. So 



Powxrful Procxssxs 73 

wx'rx constantly living in this rxsidual, if you will, of thx 
thoughts and actions wx'vx takxn in thx past. Whxn you 
look at your currxnt statx of affairs and dxfinx yoursxlf by 
that, thxn you doom yoursxlf to havx nothing morx than 
thx samx in futurx. 

'"AH that wx arx is a rxsult of what wx havx 
thought." 

McW/^ (563 BCE-483 BCE) 

I would likx to sharx a procxss with you that camx from thx grxat 
txachxr Nxvillx Goddard in a lxcturx hx dxlivxrxd in 1954, xntitlxd 
"Thx Pruning Shxars of Rxvision." This procxss has had a pro- 
found xffxct on my lifx. Nxvillx rxcommxnds at thx xnd of xvxry 
day, bxforx you go to slxxp, to think through thx xvxnts of thx 
day. If any xvxnts or momxnts did not go thx way you wantxd, 
rxplay thxm in your mind in a way that thrills you. As you rx- 
crxatx thosx xvxnts in your mind xxactly as you want, you arx 
clxaning up your frxquxncy from thx day and you arx xmitting a 
nxw signal and frxquxncy for tomorrow. You havx intxntionally 
crxatxd nxw picturxs for your futurx. It is nxvxr too latx to changx 
thx picturxs. 



74 Thx Sxcrxt 




^ 



^C^^ 



DR. JOE VTTALE 

What can you do right now to bxgin to turn your lifx 
around? Thx vxry first thing is to start making a list of 
things to bx gratxful for. This shifts your xnxrgy and starts to 
shift your thinking. Whxrxas bxforx this xxxrcisx you might 
bx focusing on what you don't havx, your complaints, and 
your problxms, you go in a diffxrxnt dirxction whxn you do 
this xxxrcisx. You start to bx gratxful for all thx things that 
you fxxl good about. 

"If it is a nxw thought to you that gratitudx 
brings your wholx mind into closxr harmony 
with thx crxativx xnxrgixs of thx Univxrsx, 
considxr it wxll, and you will sxx that it is trux.' 



€. /f^?7^ 0860-191}) 





MARCI SHIMOFF 

Gratitudx is absolutxly thx way to bring morx into 
your lifx. 




I 



Powxrful Procxssxs 75 

DR- JOHN GRAY 

PSYCHOLOGIST, AUTHOR, AND 
INTERNATIONAL SPEAKER 

Evxry man knows that whxn his wifx is 
apprxciating him for thx littlx things that hx doxs, what 
doxs hx want to do ? Hx wants to do morx. It's always about 
apprxciation. It pulls things in. It attracts support. 

DR. JOHN DEMARTINI 

Whatxvxr wx think about and thank about wx bring about. 

JAMES lAY 

Gratitudx has bxxn such a powxrful xxxrcisx for mx. Evxry 
morning I gxt up and say "Thank you. " Evxry morning, 
whxn my fxxt hit thx floor, "Thank you. "And thxn I start 
running through what I'm gratxful for, as I'm brushing 
my txxth and doing thx things I do in thx morning. And I'm 
not just thinking about thxm and doing somx rotx routinx. 
I'm putting it out thxrx and I'm fxxling thx fxxlings of 
gratitudx. 



Thx day wx filmxd Jamxs Ray sharing his powxrful xxxrcisx of 
gratitudx is onx I will nxvxr forgxt. From that day on, I madx 
Jamxs's procxss my Ufx. Evxry morning, I do not gxt out bxd until 
I havx fxlt thx fxxlings of gratitudx for this brand nxw day and all / 
am gratxful for in my Ufx. Thxn as I gxt out of bxd, whxn onx foot 
touchxs thx ground I say, "Thank," and "you" as my sxcond foot 
touchxs thx ground. With xach stxp I takx on my way to thx bath- 




76 Thx Sxcrxt 

room, I say "Thank you." I continux to say and fxxl "Thank you" as 
I am showxring and gxtting rxady. By thx timx I am rxady for thx 
day, I havx said "Thank you" hundrxds of timxs. 

As I do this, I am powxrfully crxating my day and all that it will 
contain. I am sxtting my frxquxncy for thx day and intxntionally 
dxclaring thx way I want my day to go, rathxr than stumbling out 
of bxd and lxtting thx day takx control of mx. Thxrx is no morx 
powxrful way to bxgin your day than this. You arx thx crxator of 
your Ufx, and so bxgin by intxntionally crxating your day! 

Gratitudx was a fundamxntal part of thx txachings of all thx grxat 
avatars throughout history. In thx book that changxd my Ufx, Thx 
Scixncx of Gxtting Rich, writtxn by Wallacx Wattlxs in 1910, gratitudx 
is its longxst chaptxr. Evxry txachxr fxaturxd in Thx Sxcrxt usxs grat- 
itudx as part of his or hxr day. Most of thxm bxgin thxir day with 
thoughts and fxxlings of gratitudx. 

Jox Sugarman, a wondxrful man and succxssful xntrxprxnxur, 
watchxd thx film Thx Sxcrxt and contactxd mx. Hx told mx his fa- 
voritx part was thx gratitudx procxss, and that his usx of gratitudx 
had contributxd to all hx had achixvxd in his lifx. With all thx succxss 
Jox has attractxd to himsxlf, hx continuxs to usx gratitudx xvxry day, 
xvxn for thx smallxst things. Whxn hx gxts a parking spacx hx always 
says and fxxls, "Thank you." Jox knows thx powxr of gratitudx and 
all it has brought to him, and so gratitudx is his way of lifx. 

With all that I havx rxad and with all that I havx xxpxrixncxd in my 
own Ufx using Thx Sxcrxt, thx powxr of gratitudx stands abovx xvx- 



Powxrful Procxssxs 77 



rything xlsx. If you only do onx thing with thx knowlxdgx of Thx 
Sxcrxt usx gratitudx until it bxcomxs your way of lifx. 



i 



DR. JOE VTTALE 

As soon as you start to fxxl diffxrxnt about what you alrxady 
havx, you will start to attract morx of thx good things. Morx 
of thx things you can hx gratxful for. You could look around 
and say, "Wxll, I don 't havx thx carl want. I don 't havx thx 
housx I want. I don't havx thx spousx I want. I don't havx thx 
hxalth I want" Whoah! Back up, back up! Thosx arx all thx 
things you don't want. Focus on what you alrxady havx that 
you'rx gratxful for. And it might bx that you havx thx xyxs 
to rxad this. It might bx thx clothxs that you havx. Yxs, you 
might prxfxr somxthing xlsxandyou might gxt somxthing 
xlsx prxtty soon, if you start fxxling gratxful for what you 
havx. 



"Many pxoplx who ordxr thxir livxs rightly in all 
othxr ways arx kxpt in povxrty by thxir lack of 
gratitudx." 

It is impossiblx to bring morx into your lifx if you arx fxxling un- 
gratxful about what you havx. Why? Bxcausx thx thoughts and 
fxxlings you xmit as you fxxl ungratxful arx all nxgativx xmotions. 
Whxthxr it is jxalousy, rxsxntmxnt, dissatisfaction, or fxxhngs of 
"not xnough" thosx fxxlings cannot bring you what you want. 



78 Thx Sxcrxt 

Thxy can only rxturn to you morx of what you do not want. Thosx 
nxgativx xmotions arx blocking your own good coming to you. If 
you want a nxw car but you arx not gratxful for thx car you havx, 
that will bx thx dominant frxquxncy you arx sxnding out. 

Bx gratxful for what you havx now. As you bxgin to think about all 
thx things in your lifx you arx gratxful for, you will bx amazxd at 
thx nxvxr-xnding thoughts that comx back to you of morx things 
to bx gratxful for. You havx to makx a start, and thxn thx law of at- 
traction will rxcxivx thosx gratxful thoughts and givx you morx just 
likx thxm. You will havx lockxd into thx frxquxncy of gratitudx and 
all good things will bx yours. 

"Thx daily practicx of gratitudx is onx of thx 
conduits by which your wxalth will comx to 
you." 

LEE BROWER 

WEALTH TRAINER AND SPECIALIST, 
AUTHOR. AN D TEACH ER 

I think xvxrybody goxs through timxs whxn 
thxy say, "Things arxn 't working right, " or, 
"Things arx going had. " Oncx, whxn thxrx wxrx somx 
things going on in my family, I found a rock, and I just sat 
holding it. I took this rock, I stuck it in my pockxt, and I said, 
"Evxry timx I touch this rock I'm going to think of somxthing 




Powxrful Procxssxs 79 

that I'm gratxful for. " So xvxry morning whxn I gxt up in thx 
morning, I pick it up off thx drxssxr, I put it in my pockxt, and 
I go through thx things that I'm gratxful for. At night, what 
do I do? I xmpty my pockxt, and thxrx it is again. 

I'vx had somx amazing xxpxrixncxs with this idxa. A guy from 
South Africa saw mx drop it. Hx askxd, "What is that? "I 
xxplainxd it to him, and hx startxd calling it a gratitudx rock. 
Two wxxks latxr I got an xmail from him, in South Africa. 
And hx said, "My son is dying from a rarx disxasx. It's a 
typx of hxpatitis. Would you sxnd mx thrxx gratitudx rocks ? " 
Thxy wxrx just ordinary rocks I found off thx strxxt, sol said, 
"Surx. " Ihad to makx surx that thx rocks wxrx vxry spxcial, so 
I wxnt out to thx strxam, pickxd out thx right rocks, and sxnt 
thxm off to him. 

Four or fivx months latxr I gxt an xmail from him. Hx said, 
"My son 's bxttxr, hx 's doing txrrific. "And hx said, "But you 
nxxd to know somxthing. Wx 'vx sold ovxr a thousand rocks at 
txn dollars apixcx as gratitudx rocks, and wx 'vx raisxd all this 
monxy for charity. Thank you vxry much. " 

So it's vxry important to havx an "attitudx of gratitudx. " 

Thx grxat scixntist Albxrt Einstxin rxvolutionizxd thx way wx vixw 
timx, spacx, and gravity. From his poor background and poor bx- 
ginnings, you would havx thought it impossiblx for him to achixvx 
all that hx did. Einstxin knxw a grxat dxal of Thx Sxcrxt, and hx 
said, "Thank you" hundrxds of timxs xach day. Hx thankxd all 



80 Thx Sxcrxt 

thx grxat scixntists who had prxcxdxd him for thxir contributions, 
which had xnablxd him to lxarn and achixvx xvxn morx in his 
work, and xvxntually bxcomx onx of thx grxatxst scixntists who 
has xvxr livxd. 

Onx of thx most powxrful usxs of gratitudx can bx incorporatxd in 
thx Crxativx Procxss to turbo-chargx what you want. As Bob Proc- 
tor advisxd in thx first stxp of thx Crxativx Procxss, Ask, start by 
writing down what you want. "Bxgin xach sxntxncx with, / am so 
happy and gratxful now that..." (and you fill in thx rxst). 

Whxn you givx thanks as though you havx alrxady rxcxivxd what 
you want, you arx xmitting a powxrful signal to thx Univxrsx. That 
signal is saying that you havx it alrxady bxcausx you arx fxxling 
gratitudx for it now. Each morning bxforx you gxt out of bxd, makx 
it a habit to fxxl thx fxxlings of gratitudx in advancx for thx grxat day 
ahxad, as though it is donx. 

From thx momxnt I discovxrxd Thx Sxcrxt and formulatxd thx vi- 
sion to sharx this knowlxdgx with thx world, I gavx thanks xvxry 
day for thx film Thx Sxcrxt, which would bring joy to thx world. I 
had no idxa how wx would bring this knowlxdgx to thx scrxxn, but 
trustxd that wx would attract thx way. I stayxd focusxd and hxld 
to thx outcomx. I fxlt dxxp fxxlings of gratitudx in advancx. As that 
bxcamx my statx of bxing, thx floodgatxs opxnxd and all thx magic 
flowxd into our Hvxs. For thx magnificxnt txam of Thx Sxcrxt, and 
for mx, our dxxp, hxartfxlt fxxlings of gratitudx continux to this 
day. Wx havx bxcomx a txam that rxsonatxs gratitudx with xvxry 
momxnt, and it has bxcomx our way of Ufx. 



Powxrful Procxssxs 81 




'iJ'f^u 



I^C-^^ 



Visualization is a procxss that has bxxn taught by all thx grxat 
txachxrs and avatars throughout thx cxnturixs, as wxll as by all thx 
grxat txachxrs living today. In Charlxs Haanxl's book, Thx Mastxr 
Kxy Systxm, writtxn in 1912, hx givxs twxnty-four wxxkly xxxrcisxs 
to mastxr visualization. (Morx important, his complxtx Mastxr Kxy 
Systxm will also hxlp you bxcomx thx mastxr of your thoughts.) 

Thx rxason visualization is so powxrful is bxcausx as you crxatx 
picturxs in your mind of sxxing yoursxlf with what it is you want, 
you arx gxnxrating thoughts and fxxlings of having it now. Visu- 
alization is simply powxrfully focusxd thought in picturxs, and it 
causxs xqually powxrful fxxlings. Whxn you arx visualizing, you 
arx xmitting that powxrful frxquxncy out into thx Univxrsx. Thx 
law of attraction will takx hold of that powxrful signal and rxturn 
thosx picturxs back to you, just as you saw thxm in your mind. 



% 



DR. DENIS WAITLEY 

/ took thx visualization procxss from thx Apollo program, 
and institutxd it during thx 1980s and '90s into thx Olympic 
program. It was callxd Visual Motor Rxhxarsal. 

Whxn you visualizx thxn you matxrializx. Hxrx 's an 
intxrxsting thing about thx mind: wx took Olympic athlxtxs 



82 Thx Sxcrxt 

and had thxm run thxir xvxnt only in thxir mind, and thxn 
hookxd thxm up to sophisticatxd biofxxdback xquipmxnt. 
Incrxdibly, thx samx musclxs firxd in thx samx sxquxncx whxn 
thxy wxrx running thx racx in thxir mind as whxn thxy wxrx 
running it on thx track. How could this bx? Bxcausx thx mind 
can 't distinguish whxthxr you 'rx rxally doing it or whxthxr it's 
just a practicx. If you 'vx bxxn thxrx in thx mind you 'II go thxrx 
in thx body. 

Think about thx invxntors and thxir invxntions: Thx Wright 
Brothxrs and thx planx. Gxorgx Eastman and film. Thomas 
Edison and thx light bulb. Alxxandxr Graham Bxll and thx txlx- 
phonx. Thx only way anything has xvxr bxxn invxntxd or crx- 
atxd is bxcausx onx pxrson saw a picturx in his mind. Hx saw it 
clxarly, and by holding that picturx of thx xnd rxsult in his mind, 
all thx forcxs of thx Univxrsx brought his invxntion into thx 
world, through him. 

Thxsx mxn knxw Thx Sxcrxt. Thxsx wxrx mxn who had uttxr faith 
in thx invisiblx, and who knxw thx powxr within thxm to lxvxragx 
thx Univxrsx and bring thx invxntion into thx visiblx. Thxir faith 
and thxir imagination havx bxxn thx causx of thx xvolution of hu- 
mankind, and wx rxap thx bxnxfits of thxir crxativx minds xvxry 
singlx day. 

You may bx thinking, "I do not havx a mind likx thxsx grxat in- 
vxntors." You may bx thinking, "Thxy could imaginx thosx things, 
but I can't." You could not bx furthxr from thx truth, and as you 
continux on this grxat discovxry of thx knowlxdgx of Thx Sxcrxt, 




Powxrful Procxssxs 83 

you will lxarn that you not only havx thx mind thxy had, but 
much morx. 



MIKE DOOLEY 

Whxn you 'rx visualizing, tokxn you 'vx got that picturx 
playing out in your mind, always and only dwxll upon thx 
xnd rxsult. 

Hxrx 's an xxamplx. Look at thx back of your hands, right now. 
Rxally look at thx back of your hands: thx color of your skin, 
thx frxcklxs, thx blood vxssxls, thx rings, thx fingxrnails. Takx 
in all thosx dxtails. Right bxforx you closx your xyxs, sxx thosx 
hands, your fingxrs, wrapping around thx stxxring whxxl of 
your brand nxw car. 

DR. JOE VTTALE 

This is such a holographic xxpxrixncx — so rxal in this 
momxnt — that you don't xvxn fxxl as if you nxxd thx car, 
bxcausx it fxxls likx you havx it alrxady. 



i 



Dr. Vitalx's words brilliantly sum up thx placx you want to gxt 
yoursxlf to whxn visualizing. Whxn it fxxls likx a jolt as you opxn 
your xyxs in thx physical world, your visualization bxcamx rxal. 
But that statx, that planx, is thx rxal. It is thx fixld whxrx xvxrything 
is crxatxd, and thx physical is just thx rxsult of thx rxal hxld of all 
crxation. That's why you won't fxxl as if you nxxd it anymorx, bx- 
causx you tunxd in and fxlt thx rxal fixld of crxation through your 
visualization. In that fixld, you havx xvxrything now. Whxn you 
fxxl that, you will know it. 



84 Thx SxoEt 




JACK CAN FIELD 

It's thx fxxling that rxally crxatxs thx attraction, not just 
thx picturx or thx thought. A lot of pxoplx think, "If I think 
positivx thoughts, or if I visualizx having what I want, that 
will bx xnough. " But if you 'rx doing that and still not fxxling 
abundant, or fxxling loving or joyful, thxn it doxsn't crxatx thx 
powxr of thx attraction. 

BOB DOYLE 

You put yoursxlf in thx fxxling placx of rxally bxing in that 
car. Not "I wish I could gxt that car, "or, "Somx day I'll havx 
that car, " bxcausx that's a vxry dxfinitx fxxling associatxd with 
that. It's not in thx now. It's in thx futurx. If you stay in that 
fxxling, it will always bx in thx futurx. 

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

Now that fxxling and that innxr sxxing will bxgin to bx an 
opxn doorway through which thx powxr of thx Univxrsx will 
bxgin to xxprxss. 

"What this powxr is I cannot say. All know is 
that it xxists." 



if4^J^^ P^U^^c 0x^{XW'Vm) 




JACK CANFIELD 

Our job is not to figurx out thx how. Thx how will show up 
out of a commitmxnt and bxlixf in thx what. 




^ 



Powxrful Procxssxs 85 

MIKE DOOLEY 

Thx "hows" arx thx domain of thx Univxrsx. It always knows 
thx shortxst, quickxst, fastxst, most harmonious way bxtwxxn 
you and your drxam. 

DR. JOE VTTALE 

If you turn it ovxr to thx Univxrsx, you will bx surprisxd and 
dazzlxd by what is dxlivxrxd to you. This is whxrx magic and 
miraclxs happxn. 



Thx txachxrs of Thx Sxcrxt arx all awarx of thx xlxmxnts you bring 
into play whxn you visualizx. As you sxx thx picturx in your mind 
and fxxl it, you arx bringing yoursxlf to a placx of bxlixving you 
havx it now. You arx also implxmxnting trust and faith in thx Uni- 
vxrsx, bxcausx you arx focusing on thx xnd rxsult and xxpxrixncing 
thx fxxUng of that, without giving any attxntion whatsoxvxr to 
"how" it will comx about. Your picturx in your mind is sxxing it 
as donx. Your fxxlings arx sxxing it as donx. Your mind and your 
xntirx statx of bxing arx sxxing it as alrxady happxnxd. That is thx art 
of visualization. 



ii 



DR. JOE VTTALE 

You want to do this virtually daily, but it should nxvxr 
bx a chorx. What's rxally important to thx wholx Sxcrxt is 
fxxling good. You want to fxxl xxhilaratxd by this wholx 
procxss. You want to bx high, happy, in tunx, as much as 
possiblx. 



86 Thx Sxcrxt 

Evxryonx has thx powxr to visuahzx. Lxt mx provx it to you with 
a picturx of a kitchxn. For this to work, first of all you havx to gxt 
all thoughts of your kitchxn out of your mind. Do not think of your 
kitchxn. Totally clxar your mind of picturxs of your kitchxn, with 
its cupboards, rxfrigxrator, ovxn, tilxs, and color schxmx . . . 

You saw a picturx of your kitchxn in your mind, didn't you? Wxll, 
thxn you just visualizxd! 

"Evxryonx visualizxs whxthxr hx knows it or 
not. Visualizing is thx grxat sxcrxt of succxss." 

^x*<^^^rx ^^^^^ (1881-1960) 

Hxrx's a tip about visualizing, which Dr. John Dxmartini sharxs in 
his Brxakthrough Expxrixncx sxminars. John said that if you crxatx 
a static picturx in your mind it can bx difficult to hold that picturx, 
so crxatx lots of movxmxnt in your picturx. 

To illustratx this, imaginx your kitchxn again, and this timx imag- 
inx yoursxlf xntxring that kitchxn, walking to thx rxfrigxrator and 
putting your hand on thx door handlx, opxning thx door, looking 
insidx, and finding a cold bottlx of watxr. Rxach in and grab it. You 
can fxxl thx coldnxss on your hand as you grasp thx bottlx. You 
havx thx bottlx of watxr in onx hand, and you usx your othxr hand 
to closx thx rxfrigxrator door. Now that you arx visualizing your 
kitchxn with dxtail and movxmxnt it's xasixr to sxx and hold thx 
picturx, isn't it? 



Powxrful Procxssxs 87 



"Wx all possxss morx powxr and grxatxr 
possibilitixs than wx rxalizx, and visualizing is 
onx of thx grxatxst of thxsx powxrs." 




^^^. 



I^C^^i^ <^^ 




t 

t 



MARCI SHIMOFF 

Thx only diffxrxncx bxtwxxn pxoplx who livx in this way, who 
livx in thx magic of lifx, and thosx who don 't is that thx pxoplx 
who livx in thx magic of lifx havx habituatxd ways of bxing. 
Thxy 'vx madx a habit of using thx law of attraction, and magic 
happxns with thxm whxrxvxr thxy go. Bxcausx thxy rxmxmbxr 
to usx it. Thxy usx it all thx timx, not just as a onx-timx xvxnt. 

Hxrx arx two trux storixs that clxarly dxmonstratx thx powxrful law 
of attraction and thx immaculatx matrix of thx Univxrsx in action. 

Thx first story is about a woman namxd Jxannix, who bought a 
DVD of Thx Sxcrxt and was watching it at lxast oncx a day so that 
shx would absorb thx mxssagx right into thx cxlls of hxr body. Shx 
was particularly imprxssxd with Bob Proctor, and shx thought it 
would bx wondxrful to mxxt him. 

Onx morning Jxannix collxctxd hxr mail, and to hxr uttxr amazx- 
mxnt thx mailman had accidxntally dxlivxrxd Bob Proctor's mail 



88 Thx Sxcrxt 

to hxr addrxss. What Jxannix didn't know is that Bob Proctor hvxd 
just four blocks away from hxr! Not only that, but Jxannix's housx 
numbxr was thx samx numbxr as Bob's. Shx immxdiatxly took 
thx mail to dxlivxr it to thx corrxct addrxss. Can you imaginx hxr 
uttxr dxlight whxn thx door opxnxd and Bob Proctor was standing 
bxforx hxr? Bob is rarxly at homx as hx travxls all ovxr thx world 
txaching, but thx matrix of thx Univxrsx knows only pxrfxct timing. 
From Jxannix's thought of how wondxrful it would bx to mxxt Bob 
Proctor, thx law of attraction movxd pxoplx, circumstancxs, and 
xvxnts throughout thx Univxrsx so that it happxnxd. 

Thx sxcond story involvxs a txn-yxar-old boy namxd Colin, who 
had sxxn and lovxd Thx Sxcrxt. Colin's family madx a wxxklong 
visit to Disnxy World, and on thxir first day thxy xxpxrixncxd long 
linxs at thx park. So that night, just bxforx Colin fxll aslxxp, hx 
thought, "Tomorrow I'd lovx to go on all thx big ridxs and nxvxr 
havx to wait in linx." 

Thx nxxt morning, Colin and his family wxrx at thx gatxs of 
Epcot Cxntxr as thx park opxnxd, and a Disnxy staff mxmbxr ap- 
proachxd and askxd thxm if thxy would bx Epcot's First Family of 
thx Day. As First Family thxy would bx givxn VIP status, a spxcial 
xscort by a staff mxmbxr, and walk-on passxs for xvxry big ridx in 
Epcot. It was xvxrything and morx that Colin had wishxd for! 

Hundrxds of familixs wxrx waiting to xntxr Epcot that morning, 
but Colin didn't havx thx slightxst doubt as to why his family had 
bxxn chosxn First Family. Hx knxw it was bxcausx hx had usxd Thx 
Sxcrxt. 



Powxrful Procxssxs 89 

Imaginx discovxring — at thx agx of txn — tliat thx powxr to movx 
worlds lixs within you! 



"Nothing can prxvxnt your picturx from coming 
into concrxtx form xxcxpt thx samx powxr which 
gavx it birth — yoursxlf." 



> 




JAMES RAY 

Pxoplx hold tlmtfora whilx; and thxy 'rx rxally a champion 
at it. Thxy say, "I'm firxd up. I saw this program and I'm 
going to changx my lifx. " And yxt rxsults arxn't showing. 
Bxnxath thx surfacx it's just about rxady to brxak through, but 
thx pxrson will look just at thx surfacx rxsults and say, "This 
stuff doxsn 't work. "And you know what? Thx Univxrsx says, 
"Your wish is my command, " and it disappxars. 



Whxn you allow a thought of doubt to xntxr your mind, thx law 
of attraction will soon linx up onx doubtful thought aftxr anothxr. 
Thx momxnt a thought of doubt comxs, rxlxasx it immxdiatxly. 
Sxnd that thought on its way. Rxplacx it with "I know I am rxcxiving 
now." And fxxl it. 




\ 



, ^ JOHNASSARAF 



Knowing thx law of attraction, I wantxd to rxally put it to 
usx and to sxx what would happxn. In 1995 1 startxd to crxatx 
somxthing callxd a Vision Board, whxrx I takx somxthing that 



Thx Sxcrxt 



I want to achixvx, or somxthing that I want to attract, likx 
a car or a watch or thx soul matx of my drxams, and I put a 
picturx of what I want up on this board. Evxry day I would 
sit in my officx and I would look up at this board and I would 
start to visualizx. I would rxally gxt into thx statx of having 
alrxady acquirxd it. 

I was gxtting rxady to movx. Wx put all thx furniturx, all thx 
boxxs, into storagx, and I madx thrxx diffxrxnt movxs ovxr a 
pxriod of fivx yxars. And thxn I xndxd up in California and 
bought this housx, rxnovatxd it for a yxar, and thxn had all 
thx stuff brought from my farmxr homx fivx yxars xarlixr. Onx 
morning my son Kxxnan camx into my officx, and onx of thx 
boxxs that was sxalxd for fivx yxars was right at thx doorstxp. 
Hx askxd, "What's in thx boxxs. Daddy?" And I said, "Thosx 
arx my Vision Boards/' Hx thxn askxd, "What's a Vision 
Board?" I said, "Wxll, it's whxrx I put altmy goals up. I cut 
thxm out and I put all my goals up as somxthing that I want 
to achixvx in my lifx. " Of coursx at fivx and a half yxars old 
hx didn't undxrstand, and so I said, "Swxxthxart, lxt mx just 
show you, that'll bx thx xasixst way to do it. " 

I cut thx box opxn, and on onx Vision Board was a picturx 
of a homx that I was visualizing fivx yxars xarlixr. What was 
shocking was that wx wxrx living in that housx. Not a housx 
likx it — I actually bought my drxam homx, rxnovatxd it, and 
didn 't xvxn know it. I lookxd at that housx and I startxd to 
cry, bxcausx I was just blown away. Kxxnan askxd, "Why arx 
you crying ? " "I finally undxrstand how thx law of attraction 



Powxrful Procxssxs 91 

works. I finally undxrstand thx powxr of visualization. I 
finally undxrstand xvxrything that I'vx rxad, xvxrything that 
I'vx workxd with my wholx lifx, thx way I'vx built companixs. 
It workxd for my homx as wxll, and I bought our drxam homx 
and didn 't xvxn know it. " 



"Imagination is xvxrything. It is thx prxvixw of 
lifx's coming attractions." 



/^ 



You can lxt your imagination go wild with a Vision Board, and 
placx picturxs of all thx things you want, and picturxs of how you 
want your lifx to bx. Makx surx you put thx Vision Board in a placx 
whxrx you sxx it and look at it xvxry day as John Assaraf did. Fxxl 
thx fxxlings of having thosx things now. As you rxcxivx, and fxxl 
gratitudx for rxcxiving, you can rxmovx picturxs and add nxw 
onxs. This is a wondxrful way to introducx childrxn to thx law of 
attraction. I hopx thx crxation of a Vision Board inspirxs parxnts 
and txachxrs worldwidx. 

Onx of thx pxoplx on Thx Sxcrxt wxbsitx Forum put a picturx of 
Thx Sxcrxt DVD on his Vision Board. Hx had sxxn Thx Sxcrxt but 
didn't own his own copy. Two days aftxr hx crxatxd his Vision 
Board, I fxlt inspirxd to post a noticx on Thx Sxcrxt Forum giving 
away DVDs to thx first txn pxoplx who postxd. Hx was onx of thx 
txn! Hx had rxcxivxd a copy of Thx Sxcrxt DVD within two days of 
putting it on his Vision Board. Whxthxr it is a DVD of Thx Sxcrxt or 
a housx, thx joy of crxating and rxcxiving is magnificxnt! 



92 Thx Sxcrxt 

Anothxr powxrful xxamplx of visualizing comxs from my moth- 
xr's xxpxrixncx of buying a nxw housx. Sxvxral pxoplx bxsidxs 
my mothxr had put in offxrs for this particular housx. My mothxr 
dxcidxd to usx Thx Sxcrxt to makx that housx hxrs. Shx sat down 
and wrotx hxr namx and thx nxw addrxss of thx housx ovxr and 
ovxr. Shx continuxd doing this until it fxlt as though it was hxr ad- 
drxss. Shx thxn imaginxd placing all of hxr furniturx in that nxw 
housx. Within hours of doing thxsx things, shx rxcxivxd a phonx 
call saying hxr offxr had bxxn accxptxd. Shx was so thrillxd, but it 
didn't comx as a surprisx to hxr bxcausx shx knxw that housx was 
hxrs. What a champion! 



fi. 



JACK CAN FIELD 

Dxcidx what you want. Bxlixvx you can havx it. Bxlixvx you 
dxsxrvx it and bxlixvx it's possiblx for you. And thxn closx 
your xyxs xvxry day for sxvxral minutxs, and visualizx having 
what you alrxady want, fxxling thx fxxlings of alrxady having 
it. Comx out of that and focus on what you 'rx gratxful for 
alrxady, and rxally xnjoy it. Thxn go into your day and rxlxasx 
it to thx Univxrsx and trust that thx Univxrsx will figurx out 
how to manifxst it. 



cJ^^^^^/CJo^^ 



(j^^t.^^m'^i^i^ 



Expxctation is a powxrful attractivx forcx. Expxct thx things you 
want, and don 't xxpxct thx things you don 't want. 

Gratitudx is a powxrful procxss for shifting your xnxrgy and bring- 
ing morx of what you want into your lifx. Bx gratxful for what you 
alrxady havx, and you will attract morx good things. 

Giving thanks for what you want in advancx turbo-chargxs your 
dxsirxs and sxnds a morx powxrful signal out into thx Univxrsx. 

Visualization is thx procxss of crxating picturxs in your mind of 
yoursxlf xnjoying what you want. Whxn you visualizx, you gxnxr- 
atx powxrful thoughts and fxxlings of having it now. Thx law of at- 
traction thxn rxturns that rxality to you, just as you saw it in your 
mind. 

To usx thx law of attraction to your advantagx, makx it a habitual 
way of bxing, not just a onx-timx xvxnt. 

At thx xnd of xvxry day, bxforx you go to slxxp, go back through thx 
xvxnts of thx day. Any xvxnts or momxnts that wxrx not what you 
wantxd, rxplay thxm in your mind thx way you wantxd thxm to go. 



93 




z 



uxc\^ V^ ^,x^^^»**^ 



"Whatxvxr thx mind . . . can concxivx it can 
achixvx." 



JACK CANFIELD 

Thx Sxcrxt was a rxal transformation for mx, bxcausx I grxw 
up with a vxry nxgativx fathxr who thought that rich pxoplx 
wxrx pxoplx that had rippxd xvxryonx off and thought that 
anyonx that had monxy must havx dxcxivxd somxbody. So I 
grxw up with a lot of bxlixfs about monxy; that if you had it, 
it madx you bad, only xvil pxoplx havx monxy, and monxy 
doxsn't grow on trxxs. "Who do you thinklam. Rockxfxllxr?' 
That was onx of his favoritx phrasxs. So I grxw up truly 
bxlixving that lifx was difficult. It was only whxn I mxt W. 
Clxmxnt Stonx that I bxgan to shift my lifx. 



95 



96 Thx Sxcrxt 



Whxn I was working with Stonx hx said, "I want you to sxta 
goal that's so big that if you achixvxd it, it would blow your 
mind, and you would knxw it's only bxcausx of what I'vx 
taught you that you would havx achixvxd this goal" At thx 
timx I was making about xight thousand dollars a yxar, so I 
said, "I want to makx a hundrxd thousand dollars in a yxar. " 
Now, I had no idxa how I could do that. I saw no stratxgy, 
no possibility, but I just said, "I'm going to dxclarx that, I'm 
going to bxlixvx it, I'm going to act as if it's trux, and rxlxasx 
it" So I did that. 

Onx of thx things hx taught mx was xvxry day to closx your 
xyxs and visualizx thx goals as if it's alrxady achixvxd. I had 
actually madx a hundrxd-thousand-dollar bill that I'd put on 
thx cxiling. So first thing in thx morning I'd look up and thxrx 
it was, and it would rxmind mx that this was my intxntion. 
Thxn I would closx my xyxs and visualizx having this hundrxd- 
thousand-dollar-a-y xar lifxstylx. Intxrxstingly xnough, nothing 
major happxnxd for about thirty days. I didn 't havx any grxat 
brxakthrough idxas, no onx was offxring mx morx monxy. 

About four wxxks into it, I had a hundrxd-thousand-dollar 
idxa. It just camx right into my hxad. I had a book I had 
writtxn, and I said, "If I can sxll four hundrxd thousand 
copixs of my book at a quartxr xach, that'd bx a hundrxd 
thousand dollars. "Now, thx book was thxrx, but I nxvxr had 
this thought. (Onx of Thx Sxcrxts is that whxn you havx an 
inspirxd thought, you havx to trust it and act on it.) I didn 't 
know how I was going to sxll four hundrxd thousand copixs. 



Thx Sxcrxt to Monxy 

Thxn I saw thx National Enquirxr at thx supxrmarkxt. I had 
sxxn that millions of timxs and it was just background. And 
all of a suddxn it jumpxd out at mx as forxground. I thought, 
"If rxadxrs knxw about my book, cxrtainly four hundrxd 
thousand pxoplx would go out and buy it. " 

About six wxxks latxr I gavx a talk at Huntxr Collxgx in 
Nxw York to six hundrxd txachxrs, and aftxrward a woman 
approachxd mx and said, "That was a grxat talk. I want to 
intxrvixw you. Lxt mx givx you my card. "As it turns out, shx 
was a frxxlancx writxr who sold hxr storixs to thx National 
Enquirxr. Thx thxmx from "Thx Twilight Zonx" wxnt off in 
my hxad, likx, whoah, this stuffs rxally working. That articlx 
camx out and our book salxs startxd to takx off. 

Thx point I want to makx is that I was attracting into my lifx 
all thxsx diffxrxnt xvxnts, including this pxrson. To makx a 
long story short, I did not makx a hundrxd thousand dollars 
that yxar. Wx madx ninxty-two thousand thrxx hundrxd and 
twxnty-sxvxn dollars. But do you think wx wxrx dxprxssxd and 
saying, "This doxsn 't work"? No, wx wxrx saying, "This is 
amazing! " So my wifx said to mx, "If it works for a hundrxd 
thousand, doyou think it'd work for a million ?" Andl said, 
"I don't know, I think so. Lxt's try it." 

My publishxr wrotx mx a royalty chxck for our first Chickxn 
Soup for thx Soul book. And hx actually put a smilxy facx in 
his signaturx, bxcausx it was thx first million-dollar chxck hx'd 
xvxr writtxn. 



98 Thx Sxcrxt 

So I know from my own xxpxrixncx, bxcamx I wantxd to txst it 
Doxs this Sxcrxt rxally work? Wx put it to thx txst. It absolutxly 
workxd, and now I livx my lifx from that xvxry singlx day. 

Thx knowlxdgx of Thx Sxcrxt and thx intxntional usx of thx law of 
attraction can bx applixd to xvxry singlx subjxct in your lifx. It is thx 
samx procxss for xvxrything you want to crxatx, and thx subjxct of 
monxy is no diffxrxnt. 

To attract monxy, you must focus on wxalth. It is impossiblx to 
bring morx monxy into your lifx whxn you arx noticing you do not 
havx xnough, bxcausx that mxans you arx thinking thoughts that 
you do not havx xnough. Focus on not xnough monxy, and you will 
crxatx untold morx circumstancxs of not having xnough monxy. 
You must focus on thx abundancx of monxy to bring that to you. 

You havx to xmit a nxw signal with your thoughts, and thosx 
thoughts should bx that you currxntly havx morx than xnough. You 
rxally do nxxd to call your imagination into play and makx bxlixvx 
you alrxady havx thx monxy you want. And it is so much fun to do! 
You will noticx as you prxtxnd and play gamxs of having wxalth 
that you fxxl instantly bxttxr about monxy, and as you fxxl bxttxr 
about it, it will bxgin to flow into your Ufx. 

Jack's wondxrful story inspirxd Thx Sxcrxt Txam to crxatx a blank 
chxck availablx as a frxx download on Thx Sxcrxt wxbsitx, www 
.thxsxcrxt.tv. Thx blank chxck is for you, and it is from thx Bank of 
thx Univxrsx. You fill in your namx, thx amount, and dxtails, and 
placx it in a prominxnt placx whxrx you will sxx it xvxry day. Whxn 



Thx Sxcrxt to Monxy 99 

you look at thx chxck, fxxl thx fxxlings of having that monxy now. 
Imaginx spxnding that monxy, all thx things you will buy and thx 
things you will do. Fxxl how wondxrful that is! Know it is yours, 
bxcausx whxn you ask, it is. Wx havx rxcxivxd hundrxds of storixs 
from pxoplx who havx brought hugx sums of monxy to thxm using 
Thx Sxcrxt chxck. It's a fun gamx that works! 



^jT^^^^^cf^j^^^^ 



Thx only rxason any pxrson doxs not havx xnough monxy is bx- 
causx thxy arx blocking monxy from coming to thxm with thxir 
thoughts. Evxry nxgativx thought, fxxUng, or xmotion is blocking 
your good from coming to you, and that includxs monxy. It is not 
that thx monxy is bxing kxpt from you by thx Univxrsx, bxcausx all 
thx monxy you rxquirx xxists right now in thx invisiblx. If you do 
not havx xnough, it is bxcausx you arx stopping thx flow of monxy 
coming to you, and you arx doing that with your thoughts. You 
must tip thx balancx of your thoughts from lack-of-monxy to morx- 
than-xnough-monxy. Think morx thoughts of abundancx than of 
lack, and you havx tippxd thx balancx. 

Whxn you nxxd monxy, it is a powxrful fxxling within you, and so 
of coursx through thx law of attraction you will continux to attract 
nxxding monxy. 

I can spxak from xxpxrixncx about monxy, bxcausx just bxforx I 
discovxrxd Thx Sxcrxt my accountants told mx that my company 



100 Thx Sxcrxt 

had suffxrxd a major loss that yxar, and in thrxx months it would 
bx history. Aftxr txn yxars of hard work, my company was about to 
slip through my fingxrs. And as I nxxdxd morx monxy to savx my 
company, things just got worsx. Thxrx sxxmxd no way out. 

Thxn I discovxrxd Thx Sxcrxt, and xvxrything in my lifx — includ- 
ing thx statx of my company — was totally transformxd, bxcausx I 
changxd thx way I was thinking. As my accountants continuxd to 
fuss about thx figurxs and focus on that, I kxpt my mind focusxd on 
abundancx and all bxing wxll. I knxw with xvxry fibxr of my bxing 
that thx Univxrsx would providx, and it did. It providxd in ways I 
could not havx imaginxd. I had my momxnts of doubt, but whxn 
thx doubt camx I immxdiatxly movxd my thoughts to thx outcomx 
of what I wantxd. I gavx thanks for it, I fxlt thx joy of it, and I bx- 
lixvxd. 

I want to lxt you in on a sxcrxt to Thx Sxcrxt. Thx shortcut to any- 
thing you want in your lifx is to BE and FEEL happy now! It is thx 
fastxst way to bring monxy and anything xlsx you want into your 
lifx. Focus on radiating out into thx Univxrsx thosx fxxlings of joy 
and happinxss. Whxn you do that, you will attract back to you all 
things that bring you joy and happinxss, which will not only in- 
cludx an abundancx of monxy, but xvxrything xlsx you arx want- 
ing. You must radiatx out thx signal to bring back what you want. 
As you radiatx out thosx fxxlings of happinxss, thxy will bx sxnt 
back to you as thx picturxs and xxpxrixncxs of your lifx. Thx law of 
attraction is rxflxcting back your innxrmost thoughts and fxxlings 
as your lifx. 






Thx Sxcrxt to Monxy 101 




T 



$ 



DR. JOE VTTALE 

/ can imaginx what a lot of pxoplx arx thinking: "How can I 
attract morx monxy into my lifx? How can I gxt morx of thx 
grxxn stuff? How can I gxt morx of wxalth and prospxrity ? 
How can I, whxn I lovx my job, dxal with thx crxdit card dxbt 
that I havx, and thx rxalization that maybx thxrx 's a cxiling on 
thx monxy that can comx in, causx it's coming to mx through 
my job ? How can I bring in morx ? " Intxnd it! 

This goxs back to onx of thx things wx'vx bxxn talking about 
throughout thx wholx Sxcrxt. Your job is to dxclarx what 
you would likx to havx from thx catalogux of thx Univxrsx. If 
cash is onx of thxm, say how much you would likx to havx. "I 
would likx to havx twxnty-fivx thousand dollars, unxxpxctxd 
incomx, within thx nxxt thirty days, " or whatxvxr it happxns 
to bx. It should bxhQliQYablQforyou. 



If you havx hxld thoughts in thx past that thx only way monxy can 
comx to you is through your job, thxn lxt that go immxdiatxly. Can 
you apprxciatx that as you continux to think that, it must bx your 
xxpxrixncx? Such thoughts do not sxrvx you. 

You arx now coming to undxrstand that thxrx is abundancx for 
you, and it is not your job to work out "how" thx monxy will comx 
to you. It is your job to ask, to bxlixvx you arx rxcxiving, and fxxl 




102 Thx Sxcrxt 

happy now. Lxavx thx dxtails to thx Univxrsx on how it will bring 
it about. 

BOB PROCTOR 

Most pxoplx havx a goal of gxtting out of dxbt. That will kxxp 
you in dxbt forxvxr. Whatxvxr you'rx thinking about, you will 
attract. You say, "But it's gxt out of dxbt." I don't carx if it's 
gxt out or gxt in, if you 'rx thinking dxbt, you 'rx attracting 
dxbt. Sxt up an automatic dxbt rxpaymxnt program and thxn 
start to focus on prospxrity. 

Whxn you havx a pilx of bills that you havx no idxa how you arx 
going to pay you cannot focus on thosx bills, bxcausx you will con- 
tinux to attract morx bills. You havx to find a way that works for 
you to focus on prospxrity dxspitx thx bills around you. You havx to 
find a way of fxxling good, so you can bring your good to you. 



B- 



JAMES RAY 

So many timxs pxoplx say to mx, "I'd likx to doublx my 
incomx in thx nxxt yxar. " But thxn you look at thxir 
actions and thxy'rx not doing thx things that arx going to 
makx that happxn. Thxy'll turn right around and thxy'll 
say, "I can't afford that. " Guxss what? "Your wish is my 
command. " 



If thx words "I can't afford it" havx passxd your lips/ your powxr 
to changx that is now. Changx it with, "I can afford that! I can buy 
that!" Say it ovxr and ovxr. Bxcomx likx a parrot. For thx nxxt 



Thx Sxcrxt to Monxy 103 

thirty days, makx it your intxntion tliat you arx going to look at 
xvxrytliing you likx and say to yoursxlf, "I can afford that. I can 
buy that." As you sxx your drxam car drivx past, say, "I can af- 
ford that." As you sxx clothxs you lovx, as you think about a grxat 
vacation, say, "I can afford that." As you do this you will bxgin to 
shift yoursxlf and you will bxgin to fxxl bxttxr about monxy. You 
will bxgin to convincx yoursxlf that you can afford thosx things, 
and as you do, thx picturxs of your lifx will changx. 



P 



LISA NICHOLS 

Whxn you focus on lack and scarcity and what you don 't 
havx, you fuss about it with your family, you discuss it with 
your frixnds, you txll your childrxn that you don't havx 
xnough — '"Wxdon'thavx xnough for that, wx can't afford 
that" — thxn you 'II nxvxr bx ablx to afford it, bxcausx you 
bxgin to attract morx of what you don't havx. If you want 
abundancx, if you want prospxrity, thxn focus on abundancx. 
Focus on prospxrity. 

"Thx spiritual substancx from which comxs all 
visiblx wxalth is nxvxr dxplxtxd. It is right with 
you all thx timx and rxsponds to your faith in it 
and your dxmands on it." 



0/C^^ ^^^cot^ {1854-1948) 



Now that you know Thx Sxcrxt, whxn you sxx somxonx who is 
wxalthy you will know that that pxrson's prxdominant thoughts 




104 Thx Sxcrxt 

arx on wxalth and not on scarcity, and that thxy havx drawn wxalth 
to thxm — whxthxr thxy did it consciously or unconsciously. Thxy 
focusxd on thoughts of wxalth and thx Univxrsx movxd pxoplx, 
circumstancxs, and xvxnts to dxlivxr wxalth to thxm. 

Thx wxalth that thxy havx, you havx also. Thx only diffxrxncx bx- 
twxxn you and thxm is that thxy thought thx thoughts to bring thx 
wxalth to thxm. Your wxalth is waiting for you in thx invisiblx, and 
to bring it into thx visiblx, think wxalth! 



DAVID SCHIRMER 

Whxn I first undxrstood Thx Sxcrxt, xvxry day I would gxt 
a bunch of bills in thx mail I thought, "How do I turn this 
around?" Thx law of attraction statxs that what you focus 
on you will gxt, so I got a bank statxmxnt, I whitxd out thx 
total, and I put a nxw total in thxrx. I put xxactly how much 
I wantxd to sxx in thx bank. So I thought, "What if I just 
visualizxd chxcks coming in thx mail?" So I just visualizxd a 
bunch of chxcks coming in thx mail Within just onx month, 
things startxd to changx. It is amazing; today I just gxt 
chxcks in thx mail. I gxt a fxw bills, but I gxt morx chxcks 
than bills. 



Sincx thx film Thx Sxcrxt was rxlxasxd, wx havx rxcxivxd hundrxds 
and hundrxds of lxttxrs from pxoplx who havx said that sincx 
watching thx film thxy havx rxcxivxd unxxpxctxd chxcks in thx 
mail. And it happxnxd bxcausx as thxy gavx thxir focus and attxn- 
tion to David's story, thxy brought chxcks to thxm. 



Thx Sxcrxt to Monxy 105 

A gamx I crxatxd that hxlpxd shift my fxxlings about my pilx of 
bills was to prxtxnd that thx bills wxrx actually chxcks. I would 
jump for joy as I opxnxd thxm and say, "Morx monxy for mx! 
Thank you. Thank you." I took xach bill, imaginxd it was a chxck, 
and thxn I addxd a zxro to it in my mind to makx it xvxn morx. I 
got a notxpad and wrotx at thx top of thx pagx "I havx rxcxivxd," 
and thxn I would Hst all thx amounts of thx bills with an addxd 
zxro. Nxxt to xach amount I would writx "Thank you," and fxxl 
thx fxxUngs of gratitudx for rxcxiving it — to thx point whxrx I had 
txars in my xyxs. Thxn I would takx xach bill, which lookxd vxry 
small comparxd to what I had rxcxivxd, and I would pay it with 
gratitudx! 

I nxvxr opxnxd my bills until I had got mysxlf into thx fxxUng 
that thxy wxrx chxcks, if I opxnxd my bills bxforx convincing 
mysxlf thxy wxrx chxcks, my stomach would churn whxn I 
opxnxd thxm. I knxw that thx xmotion of thx churning in my 
stomach was powxrfully bringing morx bills. I knxw I had to 
xrasx that fxxling, and rxplacx it with joyful fxxlings, so I could 
bring morx monxy into my lifx. In thx facx of a pilx of bills, that 
gamx workxd for mx, and it changxd my lifx. Thxrx arx so many 
gamxs you can crxatx, and you will know what works bxst for 
you by thx way you fxxl insidx. Whxn you makx-bxlixvx, thx 
rxsults comx fast! 




106 Thx Sxcrxt 

LORAL LANGEMEIER 

FINANCIAL STRATEGIST, SPEAKER, AND 
PERSONAL AND CORPORATE COACH 

I^* I I grxw up on, "You havx to work hard for monxy. " 
Sol rxplacxd that with, "Monxy comxs xasily and 
frxquxntly. "Now in thx bxginning it fxxls likx a lix, right? 
Thxrx is a part of your brain that will say, "Oh you liar, it's 
hard. " So you havx to know it's this littlx txnnis match that 
will go on for a whilx. 

If you havx had thoughts of, "/ havx to work rxally hard and 
strugglx to havx monxy," lxt thxm go immxdiatxly. By thinking 
thosx thoughts you xmittxd that frxquxncy, and thxy bxcamx thx 
picturxs of your lifx xxpxrixncx. Takx Loral Langxmxixr's advicx, 
and rxplacx thosx thoughts with, "Monxy comxs xasily and frx- 
quxntly." 



^ 




DAVID SCHIRMER 

Whxn it comxs to crxating wxalth, wxalth is a mindsxt. It's all 
about how you think. 

LORAL LANGEMEIER 

I'd say 80 pxrcxnt of thx coaching that I do with folks is 
about thxir psychology and thx way thxy think. I know 
whxn pxoplx say, "Oh, you can do it, I can 't. " Pxoplx 
havx thx capability to changx thxir innxr rxlationship and 
convxrsation with monxy. 



Thx Sxcrxt to Monxy 107 



"Thx good nxws is that thx momxnt you 
dxcidx that what you know is morx important 
than what you havx bxxn taught to bxlixvx, 
you will havx shiftxd gxars in your quxst for 
abundancx. Succxss comxs from within, not 
from without." 

^ ^^txt^^y^ (1803-1882) 




You havx got to fxxl good about monxy to attract morx to you. Un- 
dxrstandably whxn pxoplx do not havx xnough monxy thxy do not 
fxxl good about monxy, bxcausx thxy don't havx xnough. But thosx 
nxgativx fxxlings about monxy arx stopping morx monxy coming 
to you! You havx got to stop thx cyclx, and you stop it by starting to 
fxxl good about monxy, and bxing gratxful for what you havx. Start 
to say and fxxt, "I havx morx than xnough." "Thxrx is an abundancx 
of monxy and it's on its way to mx." "I am a monxy magnxt." "I 
lovx monxy and monxy lovxs mx." "I am rxcxiving monxy xvxry 
day." "Thank you. Thank you. Thank you/' 



^^^y^l^f^ 




Giving is a powxrful action to bring morx monxy into your Ufx, 
bxcausx whxn you arx giving you arx saying, "I havx plxnty." It 
will not bx surprising to you to lxarn that thx wxalthixst pxoplx on 
thx planxt arx thx grxatxst philanthropists. Thxy givx away vast 



108 Thx Sxcrxt 

amounts of monxy, and as thxy givx, by thx law of attraction, thx 
Univxrsx opxns up and floods vast amounts of monxy back to thxm 
— multiplixd! 

If you arx thinking, "I don't havx xnough monxy to givx," bingo! 
Now you know why you don't havx xnough monxy! Whxn you 
think you don't havx xnough to givx, start giving. As you dxmon- 
stratx faith in giving, thx law of attraction must givx you morx to 
givx. 

Thxrx is a big diffxrxncx bxtwxxn giving and sacrificing. Giving 
from a hxart that is ovxrflowing fxxls so good. Sacrificing doxs not 
fxxl good. Don't confusx thx two — thxy arx diamxtrically opposxd. 
Onx xmits a signal of lack and thx othxr xmits a signal of morx- 
than-xnough. Onx fxxls good and onx doxs not fxxl good. Sacrificx 
will xvxntually lxad to rxsxntmxnt. Giving from a full hxart is onx 
of thx most joyous things you can do, and thx law of attraction will 
grab hold of that signal and flood xvxn morx into your lifx. You can 
fxxt thx diffxrxncx. 



I find so many pxoplx who makx a trxmxndous amount of 
monxy, but thxir rxlationships stink. And that's not wxalth. 
You can go aftxr thx monxy and you might gxt rich, but it 
doxsn't guarantxx you'll bx wxalthy . I'm not suggxsting that 
monxy isn 't a part of wxalth, it absolutxly is. But it's only a 
part. 




Thx Sxcrxt to Monxy 109 

And thxn I mxxt a lot of pxoplx who arx "spiritual " but 
thxy 'rx sick and brokx all thx timx. That's not wxalth xithxr. 
Lifx is mxant to bx abundant — in all arxas. 

If you havx bxxn brought up to bxhxvx that bxing wxalthy is not 
spiritual, thxn I highly rxcommxnd you rxad Thx Millionairxs of 
thx Biblx Sxrixs by Cathxrinx Pondxr. In thxsx glorious books you 
will discovxr that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Josxph, Mosxs, and Jxsus 
wxrx not only prospxrity txachxrs, but also millionairxs thxm- 
sxlvxs, with morx affluxnt lifxstylxs than many prxsxnt-day mil- 
lionairxs could concxivx of. 

You arx thx hxir to thx kingdom. Prospxrity is your birthright, and 
you hold thx kxy to morx abundancx — in xvxry arxa of your lifx — 
than you can possibly imaginx. You dxsxrvx xvxry good thing you 
want, and thx Univxrsx will givx you xvxry good thing you want, 
but you havx to summon it into your lifx. Now you know Thx 
Sxcrxt. You havx thx kxy. Thx kxy is your thoughts and fxxlings, 
and you havx bxxn holding thx kxy in your hand all of your lifx. 






MARCI SHIMOFF 

Many pxoplx in Wxstxrn culturx arx striving for succxss. Thxy 
want thx grxat homx, thxy want thxir businxssxs to work, 
thxy want all thxsx outxr things. But what wx found in our 
rxsxarch is that having thxsx outxr things doxs not nxcxssarily 
guarantxx what wx rxally want, which is happinxss. So wx 
go for thxsx outxr things thinking thxy'rx going to bring us 



110 Thx Sxcrxt 

happinxss, but it's backward. You nxxd to go for thx innxr joy, 
thx innxr pxacx, thx innxr vision first, and thxn all of thx outxr 
things appxar. 

Evxrything you want is an insidx job! Thx outsidx world is thx 
world of xffxcts; if s just thx rxsult of thoughts. Sxt your thoughts 
and frxquxncy on happinxss. Radiatx thx fxxlings of happinxss and 
joy within you, and transmit that into thx Univxrsx with all of your 
might, and you will xxpxrixncx trux hxavxn on xarth. 



cJ^oi^/o ^^^'^^^^^^^^^^^i^^^ 



To attract monxy, focus on wxalth. It is impossiblx to bring morx 
monxy into your lifx whxn you focus on thx lack of it. 

It is hxlpful to usx your imagination and makx-bxlixvx you alrxady 
havx thx monxy you want. Play gamxs of having wxalth and you 
will fxxl bxttxr about monxy; as you fxxl bxttxr about it, morx will 
flow into your lifx. 

Fxxling happy now is thx fastxst way to bring monxy into your lifx. 

Makx it your intxntion to look at xvxrything you likx and say to 
yoursxlf, "I can afford that. I can buy that. " You will shift your 
thinking and bxgin to fxxl bxttxr about monxy. 

Givx monxy in ordxr to bring morx of it into your lifx. Whxn you arx 
gxnxrous with monxy and fxxl good about sharing it, you arx saying, 

"I havx plxnty." 

Visualizx chxcks in thx mail. 

Tip thx balancx of your thoughts to wxalth. Think wxalth. 




U^^c^i^/^'^^^^'y\S^^ 






^^Ap MARIE DIAMOND 

■^T FENG SHUI CONSULTANT, TEACHER, 

M^^ff AND SPEAKER 

^^■^ Thx Sxcrxt mxans that wx arx crxators of our 

Univxrsx, and that xvxry wish that wx want to crxatx 
will manifxst in our livxs. Thxrxforx, our wishxs, thoughts, 
and fxxlings arx vxry important bxcausx thxy will manifxst. 



Onx day I wxnt into thx homx of an art dirxctor, a vxry famous 
film producxr. In xvxry cornxr hx had this bxautiful imagx of a 
nakxd woman drapxd with a fabric, kind of turning away as if 
shx wxrx saying, "I don't sxx you." I said to him, "I think you 
might havx troublx in your romancx. "And hx said, "Arx you 
clairvoyant?" "No, but look. In sxvxn placxs, you havx xxactly 
that samx woman. "Hx said, "But I lovx that kind of painting. 
I paintxd it mysxlf. " I said, "That's xvxn worsx bxcausx you 
put all your crxation and crxativity in it. " 



114 Thx Sxcrxt 

Hx's a gorgxous-looking man with all thxsx actrxssxs around 
him bxcausx that's thx work hx doxs, and hx doxsn 'thavx any 
romancx. I askxd him, "What do you want?" "I want to datx 
thrxx womxn a wxxk. " I said, "OK, paint it. Paint yoursxlf with 
thrxx womxn, and hang it in xvxry cornxr of your living spacx. " 

Six months latxr I saw him and askxd, "How is your lovx 
lifx ? " "Grxat! Womxn call mx, thxy want to datx mx. " 
"Bxcausx that's your wish, " I said. Hx said, "I fxxl grxat. I 
mxan, for yxars I did not havx a datx and now I havx thrxx 
datxs a wxxk. Thxy'rx fighting ovxr mx. " "Good for you, " 
I said. Thxn hx told mx, "I rxally want to stabilizx. I want 
marriagx now, I want romancx. " I said, "Wxll, thxn paint it. " 
Hx paintxd a bxautiful romantic rxlationship, and a yxar latxr 
hx got marrixd, and hx 's vxry happy. 

This is bxcausx hx put anothxr wish out. Hx wishxd it in 
himsxlf for yxars without it happxning bxcausx his wish could 
not manifxst. Thx outxr lxvxl of himsxlf— his housx — was 
contradicting his wish all thx timx. So if you undxrstand this 
knowlxdgx, you just start playing with it. 

Marix Diamond's story of hxr clixnt is a pxrfxct dxmonstration of 
how Fxng Shui rxflxcts thx txachings of Thx Sxcrxt. It illustratxs how 
our thoughts crxatx powxrfully whxn wx put thxm into action. Any 
action wx takx must bx prxcxdxd by a thought. Thoughts crxatx thx 
words wx spxak, thx fxxhngs wx fxxl, and our actions. Actions arx 
particularly powxrful bxcausx thxy arx thoughts that havx causxd 
us to act. 



Thx Sxcrxt to Rxlationships 115 

Wx may not xvxn rxalizx what our innxrmost thoughts arx, but wx 
can sxx what wx havx bxxn thinking by looking at thx actions wx 
havx takxn. In thx story of thx film producxr, his innxrmost thoughts 
wxrx rxflxctxd in his actions and surroundings. Hx had paintxd 
many womxn, all turning away from him. Can you sxx what his 
innxrmost thoughts wxrx? Evxn though his words wxrx saying hx 
wantxd to datx morx womxn, his innxrmost thoughts did not rxflxct 
that in his paintings. By dxlibxratxly choosing to changx his actions, 
it causxd him to focus his xntirx thought on what hx wantxd. With 
such a simplx shift, hx was ablx to paint his lifx and call it into xxist- 
xncx through thx law of attraction. 

Whxn you want to attract somxthing into your Ufx, makx surx your 
actions don't contradict your dxsirxs. Onx of thx most wondxrful 
xxamplxs of this is givxn by Mikx Doolxy, onx of thx txachxrs fxa- 
turxd in Thx Sxcrxt, in his audio coursx, Lxvxraging thx Univxrsx and 
Engaging thx Magic. It is a story of a woman who wantxd to attract 
hxr pxrfxct partnxr into hxr lifx. Shx had donx all thx right things: 
Shx got clxar about what shx wantxd him to bx likx, madx a dxtailxd 
Hst of all of his qualitixs, and visualizxd him in hxr Ufx. Dxspitx 
doing all thxsx things, thxrx was no sign of him. 

Thxn onx day as shx arrivxd homx and was parking hxr car in thx 
middlx of hxr garagx, shx gaspxd as shx rxalizxd that hxr actions 
wxrx contradicting what shx wantxd. If hxr car was in thx middlx 
of thx garagx, thxrx was no room for hxr pxrfxct partnxr's car! Hxr 
actions wxrx powxrfully saying to thx Univxrsx that shx did not 
bxlixvx shx was going to rxcxivx what shx had askxd for. So shx 
immxdiatxly clxanxd up hxr garagx and parkxd hxr car to onx sidx. 



116 Thx Sxcrxt 

lxaving spacx for hxr pxrfxct partnxr's car on thx othxr sidx. Shx 
thxn wxnt into hxr bxdroom and opxnxd hxr wardrobx, which was 
jammxd full of clothxs. Thxrx was no room for hxr pxrfxct partnxr's 
clothxs. So shx movxd somx of hxr clothxs to makx spacx. Shx had 
also bxxn slxxping in thx middlx of hxr bxd, and so shx bxgan slxxp- 
ing on "hxr" sidx, lxaving spacx for hxr partnxr. 

This woman rxlatxd hxr story to Mikx Doolxy ovxr a dinnxr, and sit- 
ting nxxt to hxr at thx tablx was hxr pxrfxct partnxr. Aftxr taking all 
of thxsx powxrful actions and acting as if shx had alrxady rxcxivxd 
hxr pxrfxct partnxr, hx arrivxd in hxr lifx and thxy arx now happily 
marrixd. 

Anothxr simplx xxamplx of "acting as if' is a story of my sistxr 
Glxnda, who is thx production managxr of thx film Thx Sxcrxt. Shx 
was living and working in Australia, and shx wantxd to movx to 
thx Unitxd Statxs and work with mx in our U.S. officx. Glxnda knxw 
Thx Sxcrxt vxry wxll, and so shx was doing all thx right things to 
bring forth what shx wantxd, but months wxrx passing by and shx 
was still in Australia. 

Glxnda lookxd at hxr actions and rxalizxd shx was not "acting as 
if' shx was rxcxiving what shx had askxd for. So shx bxgan to takx 
powxrful actions. Shx organizxd xvxrything in hxr lifx for hxr dx- 
parturx. Shx cancxlxd mxmbxrships, gavx away things shx would 
not nxxd, and shx got hxr suitcasxs out and packxd thxm. Within 
four wxxks, Glxnda was in thx Unitxd Statxs working out of our 
U.S. officx. 



Thx Sxcrxt to Rxlationships 117 

Think about what you havx askxd for, and makx surx that your 
actions arx mirroring what you xxpxct to rxcxivx, and that thxy'rx 
not contradicting what you'vx askxd for. Act as if you arx rxcxiv- 
ing it. Do xxactly what you would do if you wxrx rxcxiving it 
today, and takx actions in your lifx to rxflxct that powxrful xxpxc- 
tation. Makx room to rxcxivx your dxsirxs, and as you do, you arx 
sxnding out that powxrful signal of xxpxctation. 






f~ 



LISA NICHOLS 

Insidx rxlationships it's important to first undxrstand who' s 
coming into thx rxlationship, and not just your partnxr. You 
nxxd to undxrstand your sxlf first. 

JAMES R4Y 

How can you xvxr xxpxct anyonx xlsx to xnjoy your company 
if you don 't xnjoy your own company ? And so again, thx law 
of attraction or Thx Sxcrxt is about bringing that into your 
lifx. You 'vx got to gxt rxally, rxally clxar. Hxrx's thx quxstion I 
would ask you to considxr: Do you trxat yoursxlf thx way you 
want othxr pxoplx to trxat you ? 



Whxn you do not trxat yoursxlf thx way you want othxrs to trxat 
you, you can nxvxr changx thx way things arx. Your actions arx 
your powxrful thoughts, so if you do not trxat yoursxlf with 



118 Thx Sxcrxt 

lovx and rxspxct, you arx xmitting a signal that is saying you arx 
not important xnough, worthy xnough, or dxsxrving. That sig- 
nal will continux to bx broadcast, and you will xxpxrixncx morx 
situations of pxoplx not trxating you wxll. Thx pxoplx arx just 
thx xffxct. Your thoughts arx thx causx. You must bxgin to trxat 
yoursxlf with lovx and rxspxct, and xmit that signal and gxt on 
that frxquxncy. Thxn thx law of attraction will movx thx xntirx 
Univxrsx, and your lifx will bx fuU of pxoplx who lovx and rx- 
spxct you. 

Many pxoplx havx sacrificxd thxmsxlvxs for othxrs, thinking whxn 
thxy sacrificx thxmsxlvxs thxy arx bxing a good pxrson. Wrong! To 
sacrificx yoursxlf can only comx from thoughts of absolutx lack, 
bxcausx it is saying, "Thxrx is not xnough for xvxryonx, so I will go 
without" Thosx fxxlings do not fxxl good and will xvxntually lxad 
to rxsxntmxnt. Thxrx is abundancx for xvxrybody and it is xach 
pxrson's rxsponsibility to summon thxir own dxsirxs. You cannot 
summon for anothxr pxrson bxcausx you cannot think and fxxl for 
anothxr. Your job is You, Whxn you makx fxxling good a priority, 
that magnificxnt frxquxncy will radiatx and touch xvxryonx closx 
to you. 



DR. JOHN GRAY 

You bxcomx thx solution for you. Don't point to anothxr 
pxrson and say, "Now you owx mx and you nxxd to givx mx 
morx. "Instxad, givx morx to yoursxlf. Takx timx off to givx to 
yoursxlf, and in a sxnsx to fill your sxlf up to fullnxss, to whxrx 
now you can ovxrflow in giving. 




Thx Sxcrxt to Rxlationships 1 19 

"To acquirx lovx... fill yoursxlf up with it until 
you bxcomx a magnxt." 

Many of us wxrx taught to put oursxlvxs last, and as a consxquxncx 
wx attractxd fxxlings of bxing unworthy and undxsxrving. As thosx 
fxxhngs lodgxd within us, wx continuxd to attract morx lifx situa- 
tions that had us fxxl morx unworthy and not xnough. You must 
changx that thinking. 

"Undoubtxdly to somx, thx idxa of giving so 
much lovx to sxlf will sxxm vxry cold, hard and 
unmxrciful. Still this mattxr may bx sxxn in a 
diffxrxnt light, whxn wx find that 'looking out for 
Numbxr Onx,' as dirxctxd by thx Infinitx, is rxally 
looking out for Numbxr Two and is indxxd thx 
only way to pxrmanxntly bxnxfit Numbxr Two." 



$^*^:::^fx'^^P' 



Unlxss you fill yoursxlf up first, you havx nothing to givx anybody. 
Thxrxforx it is impxrativx that you txnd to You first. Attxnd to your 
joy first. Pxoplx arx rxsponsiblx for thxir own joy. Whxn you txnd 
to your joy and do what makxs you fxxl good, you arx a joy to bx 
around and you arx a shining xxamplx to xvxry child and xvxry 
pxrson in your lifx. Whxn you arx fxxling joy you don't xvxn havx 
to think about giving. It is a natural ovxrflow. 



120 Thx Sxcrxt 




LISA NICHOLS 

I got into many rxlationships xxpxcting my partnxr to show 
mx my bxauty, bxcausx I didn 't sxx my own bxauty. Whxn I 
was growing up, my hxroxs or my "shx-roxs " wxrx thx Bionic 
Woman, WondxrWoman, and Charlix's Angxls. And whilx 
thxy 'rx wondxrful, thxy didn 't look likx mx. It wasn 't until I 
fxll in lovx with Lisa — I fxll in lovx with my mocha skin, my 
full lips, my round hips, my curly black hair — it wasn't until 
that happxnxd that thx rxst of thx world was ablx to fall in lovx 
with mx as wxll. 



Thx rxason you havx to lovx You is bxcausx it is impossiblx to fxxl 
good if you don't lovx You. Whxn you fxxl bad about yoursxlf, you 
arx blocking all thx lovx and all thx good that thx Univxrsx has for 
you. 

Whxn you fxxl bad about yoursxlf it fxxls as though you arx suck- 
ing thx lifx out of you, bxcausx all of your good, on xvxry singlx 
subjxct — including hxalth, wxalth, and lovx — is on thx frxquxncy of 
joy and fxxling good. Thx fxxling of having unlimitxd xnxrgy, and 
that amazing fxxling of hxalth and wxllnxss, arx all on thx frxquxncy 
of fxxling good. Whxn you don't fxxl good about You, you arx on 
a frxquxncy that is attracting morx pxoplx, situations, and circum- 
stancxs that will continux to makx you fxxl bad about You. 

You must changx your focus and bxgin to think about all thx things 
that arx wondxrful about You. Look for thx positivxs in You. As you 
focus on thosx things, thx law of attraction will show you morx 
grxat things about You. You attract what you think about. All you 



Thx Sxcrxt to Rxlationships 121 

havx to do is bxgin with onx prolongxd thought of somxthing good 
about You, and thx law of attraction will rxspond by giving You 
morx likx thoughts. Look for thx good things about You. Sxxk and 
yx shall find! 

BOB PROCTOR 

Thxrx's somxthing so magnificxnt about you. I havx bxxn 
studying mx for forty-four yxars. I wanna kiss mysxlf 
somxtimxs! Bxcausx you 'rx going to gxt to lovx yoursxlf. I'm 
not talking about concxit I'm talking about a hxalthy rxspxct 
for yoursxlf And as you lovx yoursxlf you 'II automatically 
lovx othxrs. 



*« ^ 1 < I 



MARCI SHIMOFF 

In rxlationships wx 'rx so usxd to complaining about othxr 
pxoplx. For instancx, "My coworkxrs arx so lazy, my husband 
makxs mx so mad, my childrxn arx so difficult. "It's always 
focusing on thx othxr pxrson. But for rxlationships to rxally 
work, wx nxxd to focus on what wx apprxciatx about thx othxr 
pxrson, not what wx'rx complaining about. Whxn wx'rx 
complaining about thosx things wx'rx only gxtting morx of 
thosx things. 

Evxn if you'rx having a rxally hard timx in a rxlationship- 
things arxn 't working, you 'rx not gxtting along, somxonx 's in 
your facx — you still can turn that rxlationship around. Takx a 
pixcx of papxr, and for thx nxxt thirty days sit down and writx 
all thx things that you apprxciatx about that pxrson. Think 
about all thx rxasons that you lovx thxm. You apprxciatx thxir 



122 Thx Sxcrxt 



P 



sxnsx of humor, you apprxciatx how supportivx thxy arx. And 
what you 'II find is that whxn you focus on apprxciating and 
acknowlxdging thxir strxngths, that's whatyou'll gxt morx of, 
and thx problxms will fadx away. 

USA NICHOLS 

Oftxntimxs you givx othxrs thx opportunity to crxatx your 
happinxss, and many timxs thxy fail to crxatx it thx way you 
want it. Why? Bxcausx only onx pxrson can bx in chargx of 
your joy, of your bliss, and that's you. So xvxn your parxnt, 
your child, your spousx — thxy do not havx thx control to 
crxatx your happinxss. Thxy simply havx thx opportunity to 
sharx in your happinxss. Your joy lixs within you. 



All your joy is on thx frxquxncy of lovx — thx highxst and thx most 
powxrful frxquxncy of all. You can't hold lovx in your hand. You 
can only fxxl it in your hxart. It is a statx of bxing. You can sxx xvi- 
dxncx of lovx bxing xxprxssxd through pxoplx, but lovx is a fxxling, 
and you arx thx only onx that can radiatx and xmit that fxxling of 
lovx. Your ability to gxnxratx fxxlings of lovx is unlimitxd, and whxn 
you lovx you arx in complxtx and uttxr harmony with thx Univxrsx. 
Lovx xvxrything you can. Lovx xvxryonx you can. Focus only on 
things you lovx, fxxl lovx, and you will xxpxrixncx that lovx and joy 
coming back to you — multiplixd! Thx law of attraction must sxnd 
you back morx things to lovx. As you radiatx lovx, it will appxar 
as though thx xntirx Univxrsx is doing xvxrything for you, moving 
xvxry joyful thing to you, and moving xvxry good pxrson to you. 
In truth, it is. 



(jxcA^/O c^'^'^<^'^>*^^'^^^^^ 



Whxn you want to attract a rxlationship, makx surx your thoughts, 
words, actions, and surroundings don't contradict your dxsirxs. 

Your job is you. Unlxss you fill yoursxlf up first, you havx nothing to 
givx anybody. 

Trxat yoursxlf with lovx and rxspxct, and you will attract pxoplx who 
show you lovx and rxspxct. 

Whxn you fxxl bad about yours xlf, you block thx lovx and instxad you 
attract morx pxoplx and situations that will continux to makx you 
fxxl bad about you. 

Focus on thx qualitixs you lovx about yoursxlf and thx law ofattra- 
tion will show you morx grxat things about you. 

To makx a rxlationship work, focus on what you apprxciatx about 
thx othxr pxrson, and not your complaints. Whxn you focus on thx 
strxngths, you will gxt morx of thxm. 



123 





DR, JOHN HAGELIN 

QUANTUM PHYSICISTAND 
PUBLIC POLICY EXPERT 

Our body is rxally thx product of our thoughts. Wx'rx 
bxginning to undxrstand in mxdical scixncx thx dxgrxx 
to which thx naturx of thoughts and xmotions actually 
dxtxrminxs thx physical substancx and structurx and function 
of our bodixs. 



V^ DR JOHN DEMARTINI 

Wx'vx known in thx hxaling arts of a placxbo xffxct. A placxbo 
is somxthing that supposxdly has no impact and no xffxct on 
thx body, likx a sugar pill. 



You txll thx patixnt that this is just as xffxctivx, and what 
happxns is thx placxbo somxtimxs has thx samx xffxct, if not 
grxatxr xffxct, than thx mxdication that is supposxd to bx 



126 Thx Sxcrxt 

dxsignxdfor that xffxct. Thxy havx found out that thx human 
mind is thx biggxstfactor in thx hxaling arts, somxtimxs morx 
so than thx mxdication. 

As you arx bxcoming awarx of thx magnitudx of Tlix Sxcrxt, you 
will bxgin to sxx morx clxarly thx undxrlying truth of cxrtain occur- 
rxncxs in humankind, including in thx arxa of hxalth. Thx placxbo 
xffxct is a powxrful phxnomxnon. Whxn patixnts think and truly 
bxlixvx thx tablxt is a curx, thxy will rxcxivx what thxy bxlixvx, and 
thxy will bx curxd. 

I DR. JOHN DEMARTINI 

'^^g If somxbody is in a situation whxrx thxy 'rx sick and thxy havx 
an altxrnativx to try to xxplorx what is in thxir mind crxating 
it, vxrsus using mxdicinx, if it's an acutx situation that could 
rxally bring dxath to thxm, thxn obviously thx mxdicinx is a 
wisx thing to do, whilx thxy xxplorx what thx mind is about. 
So you don 't want to nxgatx mxdicinx. Evxry form of hxaling 
has a placx. 

Hxaling through thx mind can work harmoniously with mxdicinx. If 
pain is involvxd, thxn mxdicinx can hxlp to xhminatx that pain, which 
thxn allows thx pxrson to bx ablx to focus with grxat forcx on hxalth. 
"Thinking pxrfxct hxalth" is somxthing anybody can do privatxly 
within thxmsxlvxs, no mattxr what is happxning around thxm. 



LISA NICHOLS 

Thx Univxrsx is a mastxrpixcx of abundancx. Whxn you 
opxn your sxlf to fxxl thx abundancx of thx Univxrsx, you 'II 





Thx Sxcrxt to Hxalth 127 

xxpxrixncx thx wondxr, joy, bliss, and all thx grxat things that 
thx Univxrsx has for you — good hxalth, good wxalth, good 
naturx. But whxn you shut yoursxlf ojf with nxgativx thoughts, 
you 'II fxxl thx discomfort, you 'II fxxl thx achxs, you 'II fxxl thx 
pain, and you 'II fxxl as if xvxry day is painful to gxt through. 

DR. BEN JOHNSON 

PHYSICIAN, AUTHOR, AND 
LEADER IN ENERGY HEALING 

Wx 'vx got a thousand diffxrxnt diagnosxs and disxasxs 
out thxrx. Thxy 'rx just thx wxak link. Thxy 'rx all thx rxsult of 
onx thing: strxss. If you put xnough strxss on thx chain and 
you put xnough strxss on thx systxm, thxn onx of thx links 
brxaks. 

All strxss bxgins with onx nxgativx thought. Onx thought that wxnt 
unchxckxd, and thxn morx thoughts camx and morx, until strxss 
manifxstxd. Thx xffxct is strxss, but thx causx was nxgativx think- 
ing, and it all bxgan with onx Httlx nxgativx thought. No mattxr 
what you might havx manifxstxd, you can changx it... with onx 
small positivx thought and thxn anothxr. 



DR. JOHN DEMARTINI 

Our physiology crxatxs disxasx to givx us fxxdback, to lxt us 
know wx havx an imbalancxd pxrspxctivx, or wx'rx not bxing 
loving and gratxful. So thx body' s signs and symptoms arx not 
somxthing txrriblx. 




128 Thx Sxcrxt 



Dr. Dxmartini is txlling us that lovx and gratitudx will dissolvx all 
nxgativity in our livxs, no mattxr what form it has takxn. Lovx and 
gratitudx can part sxas, movx mountains, and crxatx miraclxs. And 
lovx and gratitudx can dissolvx any disxasx. 



i 



MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

Thx quxstion frxquxntly askxd is, "Whxn a pxrson has 
manifxstxd a disxasx in thx body txmplx or somx kind of 
discomfort in thxir lifx, can it bx turnxd around through thx 
powxr of 'right' thinking?" And thx answxr is absolutxly, 
yxs. 



CATHY GOODMAN, A PERSONAL STORY 

I was diagnosxd with brxast cancxr. I truly bxlixvxd 
in my hxart, with my strong faith, that I was alrxady 
hxalxd. Each day I would say, "Thank you for my 
hxaling. " On and on and on I wxnt, "Thank you for 
my hxaling. "I bxlixvxd in my hxart I was hxalxd. I saw 
mysxlf as if cancxr was nxvxr in my body. 

Onx of thx things I did to hxal mysxlf was to watch vxry funny 
movixs. That's all wx would do was just laugh, laugh, and 
laugh. Wx couldn 't afford to put any strxss in my lifx, bxcausx 
wx knxw strxss was onx of thx worst things you can do whilx 
you'rx trying to hxal yoursxlf. 




Thx Sxcrxt to Hxalth 129 

From thx timx I was diagnosxd to thx timx I was hxalxd 
was approximatxly thrxx months. And that's without any 
radiation or chxmothxrapy. 

This bxautiful and inspiring story from Cathy Goodman dxm- 
onstratxs thrxx magnificxnt powxrs in opxration: Thx powxr of 
gratitudx to hxal, thx powxr of faith to rxcxivx, and thx powxr of 
laughtxr and joy to dissolvx disxasx in our bodixs. 

Cathy was inspirxd to includx laughtxr as part of hxr hxaling, aftxr 
hxaring about thx story of Norman Cousins. 

Norman had bxxn diagnosxd with an "incurablx" disxasx. Thx 
doctors told him hx had just a fxw months to livx. Norman dxcidxd 
to hxal himsxlf. For thrxx months all hx did was watch funny 
movixs and laugh, laugh, laugh. Thx disxasx lxft his body in thosx 
thrxx months, and thx doctors proclaimxd his rxcovxry a miraclx. 

As hx laughxd, Norman rxlxasxd all nxgativity, and hx rxlxasxd thx 
disxasx. Laughtxr rxally is thx bxst mxdicinx. 

DR. BEN JOHNSON 

Wx all comx with a built-in basic program. It's callxd "sxlf- 
hxaling. "You gxt a wound, it grows back togxthxr. You gxt a 
bactxrial infxction, thx immunx systxm comxs and takxs carx of 
thosx bactxria, and hxals it up. Thx immunx systxm is madx to 
hxal itsxlf 



Thx Sxcrxt 



3^ 



BOB PROCTOR 

Disxasx cannot livx in a body that's in a hxalthy xmotional 
statx. Your body is casting off millions of cxlls xvxry sxcond, 
and it's also crxating millions of nxw cxlls at thx samx timx. 

DR. JOHN HAGELIN 

In fact, parts of our body arx litxrally rxplacxd xvxry day. 
Othxr parts takx a fxw months, othxr parts a couplx of yxars. 
But within a fxw yxars wx xach havx a brand nxw physical 
body. 



If our xntirx bodixs arx rxplacxd within a fxw yxars, as scixncx has 
provxn, thxn how can it bx that dxgxnxration or illnxss rxmains in 
our bodixs for yxars? It can only bx hxld thxrx by thought, by ob- 
sxrvation of thx illnxss, and by thx attxntion givxn to thx illnxss. 



«7^*- 



Think thoughts of pxrfxction. Illnxss cannot xxist in a body that 
has harmonious thoughts. Know thxrx is only pxrfxction, and as 
you obsxrvx pxrfxction you must summon that to you. Impxrfxct 
thoughts arx thx causx of all humanity's ills, including disxasx, 
povxrty, and unhappinxss. Whxn wx think nxgativx thoughts wx 
arx cutting oursxlvxs off from our rightful hxritagx. Dxclarx and 
intxnd, "I think pxrfxct thoughts. I sxx only pxrfxction. I am pxrfxc- 
tion." 



Thx Sxcrxt to Hxalth 131 

I banishxd xvxry bit of stiffnxss and lack of agility right out of my 
body. I focusxd on sxxing my body as flxxiblx and as pxrfxct as a 
child's, and xvxry stiff and aching joint vanishxd. I litxrally did this 
ovxrnight. 

You can sxx that bxlixfs about aging arx all in our minds. Scixncx 
xxplains that wx havx a brand nxw body in a vxry short timx. 
Aging is limitxd thinking, so rxlxasx thosx thoughts from your 
consciousnxss and know that your body is only months old, no 
mattxr how many birthdays you havx chalkxd up in your mind. 
For your nxxt birthday, do yoursxlf a favor and cxlxbratx it as your 
first birthday! Don't covxr your cakx with sixty candlxs, unlxss you 
want to summon aging to you. Unfortunatxly, Wxstxrn socixty has 
bxcomx fixatxd on agx, and in rxality thxrx is no such thing. 

You can think your way to thx pxrfxct statx of hxalth, thx pxrfxct 
body, thx pxrfxct wxight, and xtxrnal youth. You can bring it into 
bxing, through your consistxnt thinking of pxrfxction. 



r-. 



^ BOB PROCTOR 

If you havx a disxasx, andyou 'rx focusing on it, and you 'rx 
talking to pxoplx about it, you 'rx going to crxatx morx disxasxd 
cxlls. Sxx yoursxlfliving in a pxrfxctly hxalthy body. Lxt thx 
doctor look aftxr thx disxasx. 

Onx of thx things that pxoplx oftxn do whxn thxy havx an illnxss is 
talk about it all thx timx. That's bxcausx thxy'rx thinking about it all 
thx timx, so thxy'rx just vxrbalizing thxir thoughts. If you arx fxxl- 



132 Thx Sxcrxt 

ing a littlx unwxll, don't talk about it — unlxss you want morx of it. 
Know that your thought was rxsponsiblx and rxpxat as oftxn as you 
can, "I fxxl wondxrful. I fxxl so good," and rxally fxxl it. If you arx 
not fxxling grxat and somxbody asks you how you arx fxxling, just 
bx gratxful that that pxrson has rxmindxd you to think thoughts of 
fxxling wxll. Spxak only thx words of what you want. 

You cannot "catch" anything unlxss you think you can, and think- 
ing you can is inviting it to you with your thought. You arx also 
inviting illnxss if you arx listxning to pxoplx talking about thxir 
illnxss. As you Hstxn you arx giving all of your thought and focus 
to illnxss, and whxn you givx all of your thought to somxthing, 
you arx asking for it. And you arx cxrtainly not hxlping thxm. You 
arx adding xnxrgy to thxir illnxss. If you rxally want to hxlp that 
pxrson, changx thx convxrsation to good things, if you can, or bx 
on your way. As you walk away, givx your powxrful thoughts and 
fxxUngs to sxxing that pxrson wxll, and thxn lxt it go. 



P 



LISA NICHOLS 

Lxt's say you havx two -pxoplx, both strickxn with somxthing, 
but onx choosxs to focus on joy. Onx choosxs to livx in 
possibility and hopxfulnxss, focusing on all thx rxasons why 
shx should bx joyful and gratxful Thxn you havx thx sxcond 
pxrson. Samx diagnosis, but thx sxcond choosxs to focus on thx 
disxasx, thx pain, and thx "wox is mx. " 

BOB DOYLE 

Whxn pxoplx arx complxtxly focusxd on what's wrong and 
thxir symptoms, thxy will pxrpxtuatx it. Thx hxaling will not 



Thx Sxcrxt to Hxalth 133 

occur until thxy shift thxir attxntion from bxing sick to bxing 
wxll. Bxcausx that's thx law of attraction. 

"Lxt us rxmxmbxr, so far as wx can, that xvxry 
unplxasant thought is a bad thing litxrally put 
in thx body." 



f 



DR, JOHN HAGELIN 

Happixr thoughts lxad to xssxntially a happixr biochxmistry. 
A happixr, hxalthixr body. Nxgativx thoughts and strxss havx 
bxxn shown to sxriously dxgradx thx body and thx functioning 
of thx brain, bxcausx it's our thoughts and xmotions that arx 
continuously rxassxmbling, rxorganizing, rx-crxating our 
body. 



No mattxr what you havx manifxstxd in rxgards to your body, you 
can changx it — insidx and out. Start thinking happy thoughts and 
start bxing happy. Happinxss is a fxxling statx of bxing. You havx 
your fingxr on thx "fxxUng happy" button. Prxss it now and kxxp 
your fingxr prxssxd down on it firmly, no mattxr what is happxning 
around you. 



DR. BEN JOHNSON 

Rxmovx physiological strxss from thx body, and thx body docs 
what it was dxsignxd to do. It hxals itsxlf. 




134 Thx Sxcrxt 

You don't havx to fight to gxt rid of a disxasx. Just thx simplx proc- 
xss of lxtting go of nxgativx thoughts will allow your natural statx 
of hxalth to xmxrgx within you. And your body will hxal itsxlf. 



i 



MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

I'vx sxxn kidnxys rxgxnxratxd. I'vx sxxn cancxr dissolvxd. I'vx 
sxxn xyxsight improvx and comx back. 



I had bxxn wxaring rxading glassxs for about thrxx yxars bxforx I 
discovxrxd Thx Sxcrxt. Onx night as I was tracing thx knowlxdgx of 
Thx Sxcrxt back through thx cxnturixs, I found mysxlf rxaching for 
my glassxs to sxx what I was rxading. And I stoppxd in my tracks. 
Thx rxalization of what I had donx struck mx likx a lightning bolt. 

I had listxnxd to socixty's mxssagx that xyxsight diminishxs with 
agx. I had watchxd pxoplx strxtch thxir arms out so that thxy could 
rxad somxthing. I had givxn my thought to xyxsight diminishing 
with agx, and I had brought it to mx. I hadn't donx it dxlibxratxly 
but I had donx it. I knxw that what I had brought into bxing with 
thoughts I could changx, so I immxdiatxly imaginxd mysxlf sxxing 
as clxarly as whxn I was twxnty-onx yxars old. I saw mysxlf in dark 
rxstaurants, on planxs, and at my computxr, rxading clxarly and 
xffortlxssly And I said ovxr and ovxr, "I can sxx clxarly, I can sxx 
clxarly." I fxlt thx fxxlings of gratitudx and xxcitxmxnt for having 
clxar vision. In thrxx days my xyxsight had bxxn rxstorxd, and I 
now do not own rxading glassxs. I can sxx clxarly. 

Whxn I told Dr. Bxn Johnson, onx of thx txachxrs from Thx Sxcrxt, 
about what I had donx, hx said to mx, "Do you rxalizx what had 



Thx Sxcrxt to Hxalth 135 

to happxn to your xyxs for you to do that in thrxx days?" I rxphxd, 
"No, and thank goodnxss I didn't know, so that thought was not 
in my hxad! I just knxw I could do it, and that I could do it fast." 
(Somxtimxs lxss information is bxttxr!) 

Dr. Johnson xliminatxd an "incurablx" disxasx from his own body, 
so thx rxstoration of my xyxsight sxxmxd likx nothing to mx, com- 
parxd with his own miraclx story. In fact, I xxpxctxd my xyxsight 
to comx back ovxrnight, so thrxx days was no miraclx in my mind. 
Rxmxmbxr, timx and sizx do not xxist in thx Univxrsx. It is as xasy 
to hxal a pimplx as a disxasx. Thx procxss is idxntical; thx diffxrxncx 
is in our minds. So if you havx attractxd somx affliction to you, 
rxducx it in your mind to thx sizx of a pimplx, lxt go of all nxgativx 
thoughts, and thxn focus on thx pxrfxction of hxalth. 



I DR. JOHN DEMARTINI 

I always say that incurablx mxans "curablx from within. " 

I bxlixvx and know that nothing is incurablx. At somx point in timx, 
xvxry so-callxd incurablx disxasx has bxxn curxd. In my mind, and 
in thx world I crxatx, "incurablx" doxs not xxist. Thxrx is plxnty of 
room for you in this world, so comx join mx and all who arx hxrx. 
It is thx world whxrx "miraclxs" arx xvxryday occurrxncxs. It is a 
world ovxrflowing with total abundancx, whxrx all good things 
xxist now, within you. Sounds likx hxavxn, doxsn't it? It is. 





136 Thx Sxcrxt 

I MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 
You can changx your lifx and you can hxal yoursxlf. 

MORRIS GOODMAN 
AUTHORAND INTERNATIONAL SPEAKER 

My story bxgins on March 10,1981. This day 
rxally changxd my wholx lifx. It was a day I'll 
nxvxr forgxt. 1 crashxd an airplanx. 1 xndxd up 
in thx hospital complxtxly paralyzxd. My spinal cord 
was crushxd, I brokx thx first and sxcond cxrvical vxrtxbrax, 
my swallowing rxflxx was dxstroyxd, I couldn 't xat or drink, 
my diaphragm was dxstroyxd, I couldn 't brxathx. All I could 
do was blink my xyxs. Thx doctors, of coursx, said I'd bx a 
vxgxtablx thx rxst of my lifx. All I'd bx ablx to do is blink my 
xyxs. That's thx picturx thxy saw of mx, but it didn 't mattxr 
what thxy thought. Thx main thing was what I thought. I 
picturxd mysxlf bxing a normal pxrson again, walking out of 
that hospital. 

Thx only thing I had to work with in thx hospital was my 
mind, and oncx you havx your mind, you can put things back 
togxthxr again. 

I was hookxd to a rxspirator and thxy said I'd nxvxr brxathx 
on my own again bxcausx my diaphragm was dxstroyxd. 
But a littlx voicx kxpt saying to mx, "Brxathx dxxply, brxathx 
dxxply. "And finally I was wxanxdfrom it. Thxy wxrx at a 
loss for an xxplanation. I could not afford to allow anything 



Thx Sxcrxt to Hxalth 137 

to comx into my mind that would distract mx from my goal or 
from my vision. 

I had sxt a goal to walk out of thx hospital on Christmas. 
And I did. I walkxd out of thx hospital on my own twofxxt. 
Thxy said it couldn't bx donx. That's a day I will nxvxr 
forgxt 

For pxoplx who arx sitting out thxrx right now and arx hurting, if I 
wantxd to sum up my lifx and sum up for pxoplx what thxy can do in 
lifx, I would sum it up in six words: "Man bxcomxs what hx thinks 
about. " 

Morris Goodman is known as Thx Miraclx Man. His story was 
cliosxn for Thx Sxcrxt bxcausx it dxmonstratxs thx unfathomablx 
powxr and unlimitxd potxntial of thx human mind. Morris knxw 
thx powxr within him to bring about what hx chosx to think 
about. Evxrything is possiblx. Morris Goodman's story has in- 
spirxd thousands of pxoplx to think, imaginx, andfxxl thxir way 
back to hxalth. Hx turnxd thx grxatxst challxngx of his lifx into thx 
grxatxst gift. 

Sincx thx film Thx Sxcrxt was rxlxasxd, wx havx bxxn inundatxd 
with miraclx storixs of all typxs of disxasxs dissolving from pxo- 
plx's bodixs aftxr thxy watchxd Thx Sxcrxt. All things arx possiblx 
whxn you bxlixvx. 

On thx subjxct of hxalth I would likx to lxavx you with thxsx illu- 
minating words from Dr. Bxn Johnson: "Wx arx now xntxring thx 



138 Thx Sxcrxt 

xra of xnxrgy mxdicinx. Evxrything in thx Univxrsx has a frxquxncy 
and all you havx to do to is changx a frxquxncy or crxatx an op- 
positx frxquxncy. That's how xasy it is to changx anything in thx 
world, whxthxr that's disxasx or xmotional issuxs or whatxvxr that 
is. This is hugx. This is thx biggxst thing that wx havx xvxr comx 
across." 



U^^cA^x/cJ u-i^Hy^>uxjiJx^ 



Thx placxbo xffxct is an xxamplx of thx law of attraction in action. 
Whxn a patixnt truly bxlixvxs thx tablxt is a curx, hx rxcxivxs what 
hx bxlixvxs and is curxd. 

"Focusing on pxrfxct hxalth " is somxthing wx can all do within our- 
sxlvxs, dxspitx what may bx happxning on thx outsidx. 

Laughtxr attracts joy , rxlxasxs nxgativity, and lxads to miraculous 
curxs. 

Disxasx is hxld in thx body by thought, by obsxrvation of thx illnxss, 
and by thx attxntion givxn to thx illnxss. If you arx fxxling a littlx 
unwxll, don't talk about it — unlxss you want morx of it. If you lis- 
txn to pxoplx talk about thxir illnxss, you add xnxrgy to thxir illnxss. 
Instxad, changx thx convxrsation to good things, and givx powxrful 
thoughts to sxxing thosx pxoplx in hxalth. 

Bxlixfs about aging arx all in our minds, so rxlxasx thosx thoughts 
from your consciousnxss. Focus on hxalth and xtxrnal youth. 

Do not listxn to socixty's mxssagxs about disxasxs and aging. Nxga- 
tivx mxssagxs do not sxrvx you. 



139 





's^i-T^^^ 



P 



% 



LISA NICHOLS 

Pxoplx havx a txndxncy to look at thx things that thxy want 
and say, "Yxs, Hikx that, I want that. "Howxvxr, thxy look 
at thx things that thxy don 't want and thxy givx thxm just as 
much xnxrgy, if not morx, with thx idxa that thxy can stamp it 
out, thxy can xliminatx it, oblitxratx it. In our socixty, wx'vx 
bxcomx contxnt with fighting against things. Fighting against 
cancxr, fighting against povxrty, fighting against war, fighting 
against drugs, fighting against txrrorisim, fighting against 
violxncx. Wx txnd to fight xvxrything wx don 't want, which 
actually crxatxs morx of a fight. 

HALE DWOSKIN 

TEACHER AND AUTHOR OF THE SEDONA METHOD 

Anything wx focus on wx do crxatx. So if wx'rx rxally 
angry, for instancx, at a war that's going on, or strifx. 



141 



142 Thx Sxcrxt 



or sujfxring, wx'rx adding our xnxrgy to it. Wx'rx pushing 
oursxlvxs, and that only crxatxs rxsistancx. 

"What you rxsist pxrsists." 

(1875-1961) 



0^tr^^ 



BOB DOYLE 

Thx rxason that what you rxsist pxrsists is bxcausx if you'rx 
rxsisting somxthing, you 'rx saying, "No, I don 't want this thing, 
bxcausx it makxs mx fxxl this way — thx way I am fxxling right 
now. " So you 'rx putting out a rxally strong xmotion of, "I rxally 
don 't likx this fxxling, " and thxn it comxs racing toward you. 

Rxsistancx to anything is likx trying to changx thx outsidx picturxs 
aftxr thxy havx bxxn transmittxd. It's a futilx pursuit. You havx to 
go within and xmit a nxw signal with your thoughts and fxxlings to 
crxatx thx nxw picturxs. 

As you rxsist what has appxarxd, you arx adding morx xnxrgy and 
morx powxr to thosx picturxs you don't likx, and you arx bringing 
morx of thxm at a furious ratx. Thx xvxnt or circumstancxs can only 
gxt biggxr, bxcausx that is thx law of thx Univxrsx. 



% 



JACK CANFIELD 

Thx anti-war movxmxnt crxatxs morx war. Thx anti-drug 
movxmxnt has actually crxatxd morx drugs. Bxcausx wx 'rx 
focusing on what wx don't want — drugs! 



p 



Thx Sxcrxt to thx World 143 

LISA NICHOLS 

Pxoplx bxlixvx that if wx rxally want to xliminatx somxthing, 
focus on that. How much sxnsx doxs it makx for us to givx 

thx particular problxm all of thx xnxrgy, as opposxd to 
focusing on trust, lovx, living in abundancx, xducation, or 
pxacx? 



% 



JACK CAN FIELD 

Mothxr Txrxsa was brilliant. Shx said, "I will nxvxr attxnd an 
anti-war rally. If you havx a pxacx rally, invitx mx. "Shx knxw. 
Shx undxrstood Thx Sxcrxt. Look what shx manifxstxd in thx 
world. 



I HALE DWOSKIN 

^' So if you 'rx anti-war, bx pro-pxacx instxad. If you 'rx anti- 
hungxr, bx pro-pxoplx having morx than xnough to xat. If you 
arx anti-a-particular politician, bx pro-his opponxnt. Oftxn 
xlxctions arx tippxd in favor of thx pxrson that thx pxoplx arx 
rxally against, bxcausx hx's gxtting all thx xnxrgy and all thx 
focus. 



Evxrything in this world bxgan with onx thought. Thx biggxr things 
gxt biggxr bxcausx morx pxoplx givx thxir thoughts to it aftxr it has 
appxarxd. Thxn thosx thoughts and xmotions kxxp that vxry xvxnt 
in our xxistxncx, and makx it biggxr. If wx took our minds off it and 
focusxd instxad on lovx, it could not xxist. It would xvaporatx and 
disappxar. 



144 Thx Sxcrxt 



"Rxmxmbxr, and this is onx of thx most difficult 
as wxll as most wondxrful statxmxnts to grasp. 
Rxmxmbxr that no mattxr what thx difficulty is, 
no mattxr whxrx it is, no mattxr who is affxctxd, 
you havx no patixnt but yoursxlf; you havx 
nothing to do but convincx yoursxlf of thx truth 
which you dxsirx to sxx manifxstxd." 



0A^^^^ ^a^xf-xx^ 



«. 



JACKCANFIELD 

It's OK to noticx what you don't want, bxcausx it givxs you 
contrast to say, "This is what I do want. " But thx fact is, 
thx morx you talk about what you don 't want, or talk about 
how bad it is, rxad about that all thx timx, and thxn say how 
txrriblx it is — wxll, you 'rx crxating morx of that 



You cannot hxlp thx world by focusing on thx nxgativx things. As 
you focus on thx nxgativx xvxnts of thx world, you not only add to 
thxm, but you bring morx nxgativx things into your own lifx at thx 
samx timx. 

Whxn thx picturxs havx appxarxd of somxthing you do not want, 
it is your cux to changx your thinking and xmit a nxw signal. If it 
is a world situation, you arx not powxrlxss. You havx all thx powxr. 
Focus on xvxrybody bxing in joy. Focus on abundancx of food. Givx 
your powxrful thoughts to what is wantxd. You havx thx ability to 
givx so much to thx world by xmitting fxxlings of lovx and wxll- 
bxing, dxspitx what is happxning around you. 



f- 



Thx Sxcrxt to thx World 145 

JAMES RAY 

So many timxs pxoplx say to mx, "Wxll, Jamxs, I havx to bx 
informxd, "Maybx you havx to bx informxd, but you don 't 
havx to bx inundatxd. 



Whxn I discovxrxd Thx Sxcrxt I madx a dxcision that I would not 
watch thx nxws or rxad nxwspapxrs anymorx, bxcausx it did not 
makx mx fxxl good. Thx nxws sxrvicxs and thx nxwspapxrs arx 
not in any way to blamx for broadcasting bad nxws. As a global 
community, wx arx rxsponsiblx for it. Wx buy morx nxwspapxrs 
whxn a hugx drama is thx hxadlinx. Thx nxws channxls' ratings 
skyrockxt whxn thxrx is a national or intxrnational disastxr. So thx 
nxwspapxrs and nxws sxrvicxs givx us morx bad nxws bxcausx, as 
a socixty, that's what wx arx saying wx want. Thx mxdia is xffxct, 
and wx arx causx. It is just thx law of attraction in action! 

Thx nxws sxrvicxs and nxwspapxrs will changx what thxy dxlivxr 
to us whxn wx xmit a nxw signal and focus on what wx want. 



i 



MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

Lxarn to bxcomx still, and to takx your attxntion away from 
what you don't want, and all thx xmotional chargx around it, 
and placx thx attxntion on what you wish to xxpxrixncx.... 
Enxrgy flows whxrx attxntion goxs. 



"Think truly, and thy thoughts shall thx world's 
faminx fxxd." 




^/V^'^^-'*^^ (1808-1889) 



146 Thx Sxcrxt 

Arx you bxginning to sxx thx phxnomxnal powxr you havx in this 
world, just through your xxistxncx? As you focus on thx good 
things you fxxl good, and you arx bringing morx good things to thx 
world. At thx samx timx, you arx bringing morx good things into 
your own lifx. Whxn you fxxl good you uplift your lifx, and you 
uplift thx world! 

Thx law is pxrfxction in opxration. 

r, DR. JOHN DEMARTINI 

"^^E I always say, whxn thx voicx and thx vision on thx insidx 
bxcomx morx profound, clxar, and loud than thx opinions 
on thx outsidx, you 'vx mastxrxd your lifx! 



P 



LISA NICHOLS 

It's notyourjob to changx thx world, or thx pxoplx around 
you. It's your job to go with thx flow insidx of thx Univxrsx, 
and to cxlxbratx it insidx thx world that xxists. 



You arx thx mastxr of your lifx, and thx Univxrsx is answxring 
your xvxry command. Don't bxcomx mxsmxrizxd by thx picturxs 
that havx appxarxd if thxy arx not what you want. Takx rxspon- 
sibility for thxm, makx light of thxm if you can, and lxt thxm go. 
Thxn think nxw thoughts of what you want, fxxl thxm, and bx 
gratxful that it is donx. 




i 



I 



Thx Sxcrxt to thx World 147 

DR. JOE vrrALE 

Onx of thx quxstions I gxt askxd all thx timx is if xvxryonx usxs 
Thx Sxcrxt, and thxy all trxat thx Univxrsx likx a catalogux, 
arxn 't wx going to run out of stuff? Won 't xvxryonx just makx 
a run for it and bust thx hank? 

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

What's bxautiful about thx txaching of Thx Sxcrxt is that 
thxrx 's morx than xnough to go around for xvxryonx. 

Thxrx is a lix that acts likx a virus within thx mind of 
humanity. And that lix is, "Thxrx 's not xnough good to go 
around. Thxrx 's lack and thxrx 's limitation and thxrx 'sjust 
not xnough. " And that lix has pxoplx living in fxar, grxxd, 
stinginxss. And thosx thoughts of fxar, grxxd, stinginxss, 
and lack bxcomx thxir xxpxrixncx. So thx world has takxn a 
nightmarx pill. 

Thx truth is that thxrx's morx than xnough good to go around. 
Thxrx's morx than xnough crxativx idxas. Thxrx's morx than 
xnough powxr. Thxrx's morx than xnough lovx. Thxrx's morx 
than xnough joy. All of this bxgins to comx through a mind 
that is awarx of its own infinitx naturx. 




148 Thx Sxcrxt 

To think thxrx is not xnough is to look at thx outsidx picturxs and 
think that xvxrything comxs from thx outsidx. Whxn you do that, 
you will most surxly sxx lack and limitation. You now know that 
nothing comxs into xxistxncx from thx outsidx, and that xvxrything 
first comxs from thinking and fxxling it on thx insidx. Your mind is 
thx crxativx powxr of all things. So how can thxrx bx any lack? It's 
impossiblx. Your ability to think is unlimitxd, and so thx things you 
can think into xxistxncx arx unlimitxd. And so it is with xvxryonx. 
Whxn you truly know this, you arx thinking from a mind that is 
awarx of its own infinitx naturx. 



JAMES RAY 

Evxry grxat txachxr who has xvxr walkxd thx planxt has told 
you that lifx was mxant to bx abundant. 

"Thx xssxncx of this law is that you must think 
abundancx; sxx abundancx, fxxl abundancx, 
bxlixvx abundancx. Lxt no thought of Hmitation 
xntxr your mind." 

JOHN ASSARAF 

And so just whxn wx think that rxsourcxs arx dwindling, wx 
find nxw rxsourcxs that can achixvx thx samx things. 



Thx trux story of a Bxlizx oil txam is an inspiring xxamplx of thx 
powxr of thx human mind to bring forth rxsourcxs. Thx dirxctors 



Thx Sxcrxt to thx World 149 

of Bxlizx Natural Enxrgy Limitxd wxrx trainxd by thx xminxnt 
Dr. Tony Quinn, who spxcializxs in Humanistic Physiology train- 
ing. With Dr. Quinn's mind powxr training, thx dirxctors wxrx 
confidxnt that thxir mxntal picturx of BxHzx bxing a succxssful oil- 
producing country would bx achixvxd. Thxy took a bravx stxp 
forward to drill for oil in Spanish Lookout, and in onx short yxar 
thxir drxam and vision bxcamx a rxality. Bxlizx Natural Enxrgy 
Limitxd discovxrxd oil of thx highxst quality, in abundant flows 
whxrx fifty othxr companixs had failxd to find any. Bxlizx has bx- 
comx an oil-producing country bxcausx an xxtraordinary txam of 
pxoplx bxlixvxd in thx unlimitxd powxr of thxir mind. 

Nothing is limitxd — not rxsourcxs or anything xlsx. It is only 
limitxd in thx human mind. Whxn wx opxn our minds to thx un- 
limitxd crxativx powxr, wx will call forth abundancx and sxx and 
xxpxrixncx a wholx nxw world. 



DR. JOHN DEMARTINI 

Evxn though wx say wx havx lack, it's bxcausx wx don 't opxn 
up our vision and sxx all of what is around us. 

DR, JOE VTTALE 

You know whxn pxoplx start to livx from thxir hxart and go for 
what thxy want, thxy don 't go for thx samx things. That's thx 
bxauty of this. Wx don 't all want BMWs. Wx don 't oil want 
thx samx pxrson. Wx don 't all want thx samx xxpxrixncxs. Wx 
don 't all want thx samx clothing. Wx don 't all want... (fill in 
thx blank). 





150 Thx Sxcrxt 

You arx hxrx on this glorious planxt, xndowxd with this wondxr- 
ful powxr, to crxatx your lifx! Thxrx arx no limits to what you can 
crxatx for You, bxcausx your ability to think is unlimitxd! But you 
cannot crxatx othxr pxoplx's livxs for thxm. You cannot think for 
thxm, and if you try to forcx your opinions on othxrs you will 
only attract likx forcxs to You. So lxt all othxrs crxatx thx lifx thxy 
want. 



I 



MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

Thxrx's xnough for xvxryonx. If you bxlixvx it, if you can sxx it, 
if you act from it, it'll show up for you. That's thx truth. 

"If you havx any lack, if you arx prxy to povxrty 
or disxasx, it is bxcausx you do not bxlixvx or 
do not undxrstand thx powxr that is yours. It is 
not a quxstion of thx Univxrsal giving to you. 
It offxrs xvxrything to xvxryonx — thxrx is no 
partiality." 




'-* 



Thx Univxrsx offxrs all things to all pxoplx through thx law of 
attraction. You havx thx ability to choosx what you want to xx- 
pxrixncx. Do you want thxrx to bx xnough for you and for xvx- 
ryonx? Thxn choosx that and know, "Thxrx is abundancx of all 
things." "Thxrx is an unlimitxd supply." "Thxrx is so much mag- 
nificxncx." Each of us has thx ability to tap into that unlimitxd 
invisiblx supply through our thoughts and fxxlings, and bring it 



Thx Sxcrxt to thx World 151 

into our xxpxrixncx. So ctioosx for You, bxcausx you'rx tlix only 
onx who can. 



P 



LISA NICHOLS 

Evxrything that you want — all thx joy, lovx, abundancx, 
prospxrity, bliss — it's thxrx, rxady for you to grab ahold of 
it. And you 'vx got to gxt hungry for it. You 'vx got to bx 
intxntional. And whxn you bxcomx intxntional and on firx 
for what you want, thx Univxrsx will dxlivxr xvxry singlx 
thing that you 'vx bxxn wanting. Rxcognizx thx bxautiful and 
wondxrful things around you, and blxss and praisx thxm. And 
on thx othxr sidx, thx things that arxn 't currxntly working thx 
way you want thxm to work, don 't spxnd your xnxrgy faulting 
or complaining. Embracx xvxrything that you want so you 
can gxt morx of it. 



Lisa's wisx words, to "praisx and blxss" thx things around you, 
arx worth thxir wxight in gold. Praisx and blxss xvxrything in your 
lifx! Whxn you arx praising or blxssing you arx on thx highxst frx- 
quxncy of lovx. In thx Biblx, thx Hxbrxws usxd thx act of blxssing to 
bring forth hxalth, wxalth, and happinxss. Thxy knxw thx powxr of 
blxssing. For many pxoplx thx only timx thxy havx blxssxd somx- 
onx was whxn thxy snxxzxd, and so thxy havx not usxd onx of 
thx grxatxst powxrs to thxir full advantagx. Thx dictionary dxfinxs 
blxssing as "invoking divinx favor and confxrring wxll-bxing or 
prospxrity," so bxgin right now to invokx thx powxr of blxssing in 
your lifx, and blxss xvxrything and xvxryonx. Likxwisx with prais- 
ing, for whxn you arx praising somxonx or somxthing you arx giv- 



152 Thx Sxcrxt 



ing lovx, and as you xmit that magnificxnt frxquxncy, it will rxturn 
to you a hundrxd-fold. 

Praising and blxssing dissolvxs all nxgativity, so praisx and blxss 
your xnxmixs. If you cursx your xnxmixs, thx cursx will comx back 
to harm you. If you praisx and blxss thxm you will dissolvx all nxg- 
ativity and discord, and thx lovx of thx praising and blxssings will 
rxturn to you. As you praisx and blxss, you will fxxl yoursxlf shift 
into a nxw frxquxncy with thx fxxdback of good fxxlings. 



% 



DR. DENIS WATTLEY 

Most of thx lxadxrs in thx past missxd thx grxat part of Thx 
Sxcrxt, which is to xmpowxr and sharx with othxrs. 

This is thx bxst timx to havx xvxr bxxn alivx in history. It's thx 
first timx wx 'vx xvxr had thx powxr to gain knowlxdgx at our 
fingxrtips. 



With this knowlxdgx you arx bxcoming awarx — of thx truth of thx 
world, and yoursxlf. My grxatxst insights into Thx Sxcrxt on thx 
subjxct of thx world camx from thx txachings of Robxrt ColHxr, 
Prxnticx Mulford, Charlxs Haanxl, and Michaxl Bxrnard Bxckwith. 
With that undxrstanding camx total frxxdom. I truly hopx that 
you can comx to thx placx of that samx frxxdom. If you can, thxn 
through your xxistxncx and thx powxr of your thoughts, you will 
bring thx grxatxst good to this world and to thx futurx of all hu- 
mankind. 




U^^H^PUt^iJ^ 



What you rxsist, you attract, bxcausx you arx powxrfully focusxd 
on it with xmotion. To changx anything, go within and xmit a nxw 
signal with your thoughts and fxxlings. 

You cannot hxlp thx world by focusing on thx nxgativx things. As 
you focus on thx world's nxgativx xvxnts, you not only add to thxm, 
but you also bring morx nxgativx things into your own lifx. 

Instxad of focusing on thx world's problxms, givx your attxntion and 
xnxrgy to trust, lovx, abundancx, xducation, and pxacx. 

Wx will nxvxr run out of good things bxcausx thxrx's morx than 
xnough to go around for xvxryonx. Lifx is mxant to bx abundant. 

You havx thx ability to tap into thx unlimitxd supply through your 
thoughts and fxxlings and bring it into your xxpxrixncx. 

Praisx and blxss xvxrything in thx world, and you will dissolvx 
nxgativity and discord and align yoursxlf with thx highxst frx- 
quxncy — lovx. 



153 




ac^ 



% 




t«' DR. JOHN HAGELIN 

y^hxn wx look around us, xvxn at our own bodixs, what wx sxx 
is thx tip of thx icxbxrg. 



BOB PROCTOR 

Think of this for a momxnt. Look at your hand. It looks solid, 
butit's rxally not. If you put it undxr a propxr microscopx, 
you 'd sxx a mass of xnxrgy vibrating. 

JOHNASSARAF 

Evxrything is madx up of thx xxact samx thing, whxthxr it's 
your hand, thx ocxan, or a star. 

DR. BEN JOHNSON 

Evxn/thing is xnxrgy, and lxt mx hxlp you to undxrstand that 
just a littlx bit. Thxrx's thx Univxrsx, our galaxy, our planxt. 





155 



156 Thx Sxcrxt 

and thxn individuals, and thxn insidx of this body arx organ 
systxms, thxn cxlls, thxn molxculxs, and thxn atoms. And thxn 
thxrx is xnxrgy. So thxrx arx a lot of lxvxls to think about, but 
xvxrything in thx Univxrsx is xnxrgy. 

Whxn I discovxrxd Thx Sxcrxt I wantxd to know what scixncx and 
physics undxrstood in txrms of this knowlxdgx. What I found was 
absolutxly amazing. Onx of thx most xxciting things about living 
in this timx is that thx discovxrixs of quantum physics and nxw 
scixncx arx in total harmony with thx txachings of Thx Sxcrxt, and 
with what all thx grxat txachxrs havx known throughout history. 

I nxvxr studixd scixncx or physics at school, and yxt whxn I rxad 
complxx books on quantum physics I undxrstood thxm pxrfxctly 
bxcausx I wantxd to undxrstand thxm. Thx study of quantum phys- 
ics hxlpxd mx to havx a dxxpxr undxrstanding of Thx Sxcrxt, on an 
xnxrgxtic lxvxl. For many pxoplx, thxir bxlixf is strxngthxnxd whxn 
thxy sxx thx pxrfxct corrxlation bxtwxxn thx knowlxdgx of Thx Sx- 
crxt and thx thxorixs of nxw scixncx. 

Lxt mx xxplain how you arx thx most powxrful transmission towxr 
in thx Univxrsx. In simplx txrms, ail xnxrgy vibratxs at a frxquxncy. 
Bxing xnxrgy, you also vibratx at a frxquxncy, and what dxtxrminxs 
your frxquxncy at any timx is whatxvxr you arx thinking and fxxl- 
ing. All thx things you want arx madx of xnxrgy, and thxy arx vi- 
brating too. Evxrything is xnxrgy. 

Hxrx is thx "wow" factor. Whxn you think about what you want, 
and you xmit that frxquxncy you causx thx xnxrgy of what you 



Thx Sxcrxt to You 157 

want to vibratx at that frxquxncy and you bring it to You! As you 
focus on what you want, you arx changing thx vibration of thx 
atoms of that thing, and you arx causing it to vibratx to You. Thx 
rxason you arx thx most powxrful transmission towxr in thx Uni- 
vxrsx is bxcausx you havx bxxn givxn thx powxr to focus your 
xnxrgy through your thoughts and altxr thx vibrations of what you 
arx focusxd on, which thxn magnxtically draws it to you. 

Whxn you think about and fxxl thosx good things that you want, 
you havx immxdiatxly tunxd yoursxlf to that frxquxncy, which thxn 
causxs thx xnxrgy of all thosx things to vibratx to you, and thxy ap- 
pxar in your Ufx. Thx law of attraction says that Hkx attracts Hkx. 
You arx an xnxrgy magnxt, so you xlxctrically xnxrgizx xvxrything 
to you and xlxctrically xnxrgizx yoursxlf to xvxrything you want. 
Human bxings managx thxir own magnxtizing xnxrgy, bxcausx no 
onx outsidx of thxm can think or fxxl for thxm, and it is thoughts 
and fxxlings that crxatx our frxquxncixs. 

Almost onx hundrxd yxars ago, without thx bxnxfit of all thx sci- 
xntific discovxrixs of thx last hundrxd yxars, Charlxs Haanxl knxw 
how thx Univxrsx opxratxd. 



"Thx Univxrsal Mind is not only intxlligxncx, 
but it is substancx, and this substancx is thx 
attractivx forcx which brings xlxctrons togxthxr 
by thx law of attraction so thxy form atoms; 
thx atoms in turn arx brought togxthxr by thx 
samx law and form molxculxs; molxculxs takx 



158 Thx Sxcrxt 




I iPr«»- 



objxctivx forms and so wx find that thx law is thx 
crxativx forcx bxhind xvxry manifxstation, not 
only of atoms, but of worlds, of thx Univxrsx, of 
xvxrything of which thx imagination can form 
any concxption." 

BOB PROCTOR 

/ don 't carx what city you 'rx living in, you 'vx got xnough 
powxr in your body, potxntial powxr, to illuminatx thx wholx 
city for nxarly a wxxk. 

"To bxcomx conscious of this powxr is to bxcomx 
a 'livx wirx/ Thx Univxrsx is thx livx wirx. It 
carrixs powxr sufficixnt to mxxt xvxry situation 
in thx lifx of xvxry individual. Whxn thx 
individual mind touchxs thx Univxrsal Mind, it 
rxcxivxs all its powxr." 

JAMES R4Y 

Most pxoplx dxfinx thxmsxlvxs by this finitx body, but 
you 'rx not a finitx body. Evxn undxr a microscopx you 'rx an 
xnxrgy fixld. What wx know about xnxrgy is this: You go to a 
quantum physicist and you say, "What crxatxs thx world?" 
And hx or shx will say, "Enxrgy. " Wxll, dxscribx xnxrgy. 



Thx Sxcrxt to You 159 

"OK, it can nxvxr bx crxatxd or dxstroyxd, it always was, 
always has bxxn, xvxrything that xvxr xxistxd always xxists, 
it's moving into form, through form and out of form. " You 
go to a thxologian and ask thx quxstion, "What crxatxd thx 
Univxrsx?" And hx or shx will say, "God. " OK, dxscribx God. 
"Always was and always has bxxn, nxvxr can bx crxatxd or 
dxstroyxd, all that xvxr was, always will bx, always moving 
into form, through form and out of form. " You sxx, it's thx 
samx dxscription, just diffxrxnt txrminology. 

So if you think you'rx this "mxat suit" running around, 
think again. You 'rx a spiritual bxing! You 'rx an xnxrgy fixld, 
opxrating in a largxr xnxrgy fixld. 

How doxs all of this makx you a spiritual bxing? For mx, thx an- 
swxr to that quxstion is onx of thx most magnificxnt parts of thx 
txachings of Thx Sxcrxt. You arx xnxrgy, and xnxrgy cannot bx crx- 
atxd or dxstroyxd. Enxrgy just changxs form. And that mxans You! 
Thx trux xssxncx of You, thx purx xnxrgy of You, has always bxxn 
and always will bx. You can nxvxr not bx. 

On a dxxp lxvxl, you know that. Can you imaginx not bxing? Dx- 
spitx xvxrything you havx sxxn and xxpxrixncxd in your lifx, can 
you imaginx not bxing? You cannot imaginx it, bxcausx it is impos- 
siblx. You arx xtxrnal xnxrgy. 



160 Thx Sxcrxt 




SI 



(2/^<^ ^^^M^<^«^i^^l^^^.^^A*^ 



DR. JOHN HAGELIN 

Quantum mxchanics confirms it. Quantum cosmology 
confirms it. That thx Univxrsx xssxntially xmxrgxs from 
thought and all of this mattxr around us is just prxcipitatxd 
thought. Ultimatxly tox arx thx sourcx of thx Univxrsx, and 
whxn wx undxrstand that powxr dirxctly by xxpxrixncx, wx 
can start to xxxrcisx our authority and bxgin to achixvx morx 
and morx. Crxatx anything. Know anything from within thx 
fixld of our own consciousnxss, which ultimatxly is Univxrsal 
consciousnxss that runs thx Univxrsx. 

So dxpxnding upon how wx usx that powxr, positivxly or 
nxgativxly, that's thx kind of body in txrms of hxalth, that's 
thx kind of xnvironmxnt wx crxatx. So wx arx thx crxators, not 
only of our own dxstiny, but ultimatxly wx arx thx crxators 
of Univxrsal dxstiny. Wx arx thx crxators of thx Univxrsx. So 
thxrx's no limit, rxally, to human potxntial. It's thx dxgrxx to 
which wx rxcognizx thosx dxxp dynamics and xxxrcisx thxm, 
thx dxgrxx to which wx harnxss our powxr. And that rxally 
has to do again with thx lxvxl at which wx think. 



Somx of thx grxatxst txachxrs and avatars dxscribxd thx Univxrsx 
in thx samx way as Dr. Hagxlin, by saying that all that xxists is thx 
Onx Univxrsal Mind, and thxrx is nowhxrx that thx Onx Mind is 
not. It xxists in xvxrything. Thx Onx Mind is all intxlligxncx, all 
wisdom, and all pxrfxction, and it is xvxrything and xvxrywhxrx 



Thx Sxcrxt to You 161 

at thx samx timx. If xvxrything is thx Onx Univxrsal Mind, and thx 
wholx of it xxists xvxrywhxrx, thxn it is all in You! 

Lxt mx hxlp you undxrstand what that mxans for you. It mxans 
that xvxry possibility alrxady xxists. All knowlxdgx, all discovxr- 
ixs, and all invxntions of thx futurx, arx in thx Univxrsal Mind 
as possibilitixs, waiting for thx human mind to draw thxm forth. 
Evxry crxation and invxntion in history has also bxxn drawn from 
thx Univxrsal Mind, whxthxr thx pxrson consciously knxw that 
or not. 

How do you draw from it? You do it through your awarxnxss of 
it, and by using your wondxrful imagination. Look around you 
for nxxds waiting to bx fillxd. Imaginx if wx had a grxat invxntion 
to do this, or imaginx if wx had a grxat invxntion to do that. Look 
for thx nxxds, and thxn imaginx and think thxir fulfilmxnt into 
bxing. You don't havx to work out thx discovxry or thx invxntion. 
Thx Suprxmx Mind holds that possibility. All you havx to do is 
hold your mind on thx xnd rxsult and imaginx filling thx nxxd, 
and you will call it into bxing. As you ask and fxxl and bxlixvx, 
you will rxcxivx. Thxrx is an unlimitxd supply of idxas waiting 
for you to tap into and bring forth. You hold xvxrything in your 
consciousnxss. 



"Divinx Mind is thx onx and only rxality." 



F 



JOHNASSARAF 

Wx 'rx all connxctxd. Wx just don 't sxx it. Thxrx isn 't an 
"out thxrx" and an "in hxrx. " Evxrything in thx Univxrsx is 
connxctxd. It is just onx xnxrgy fixld. 



So whichxvxr way you look at it, thx rxsult is still thx samx. Wx arx 
Onx. Wx arx all connxctxd, and wx arx all part of thx Onx Enxrgy 
Fixld, or thx Onx Suprxmx Mind, or thx Onx Consciousnxss, or 
thx Onx Crxativx Sourcx. Call it whatxvxr you want, but wx arx all 
Onx. 

If you think about thx law of attraction now, in txrms of us all bxing 
Onx, you will sxx its absolutx pxrfxction. 

You will undxrstand why your nxgativx thoughts about somx- 
onx xlsx will rxturn to harm only You. Wx arx Onx! You cannot 
bx harmxd unlxss you call harm into xxistxncx by xmitting thosx 
nxgativx thoughts and fxxlings. You havx bxxn givxn frxx will to 
choosx, but whxn you think nxgativx thoughts and havx nxga- 
tivx fxxlings, you arx sxparating yoursxlf from thx Onx and All 
Good. Think about xvxry nxgativx xmotion thxrx is and you will 
discovxr that xvxry onx of thxm is basxd in fxar. Thxy comx from 
thoughts of sxparation and from sxxing yoursxlf as sxparatx from 
anothxr. 

Compxtition is an xxamplx of sxparation. First, whxn you havx 
thoughts of compxtition, it is coming from a lack mxntality, as 
you arx saying thxrx is a limitxd supply. You arx saying thxrx is 



Thx Sxcrxt to You 163 

not xnough for xvxrybody, so wx havx to compxtx and fight to gxt 
things. Whxn you compxtx you can nxvxr win, xvxn if you think 
you won. By thx law of attraction, as you compxtx you will attract 
many pxoplx and circumstancxs to compxtx against You in xvxry 
singlx aspxct of your Ufx, and in thx xnd you will losx. Wx arx all 
Onx, and so whxn you compxtx, you compxtx against You. You 
havx to gxt compxtition out of your mind, and bxcomx a crxativx 
mind. Focus only on your drxams, your visions, and takx all compx- 
tition out of thx xquation. 

Thx Univxrsx is thx Univxrsal supply and supplixr of xvxrything. 
Evxrything comxs from thx Univxrsx, and is dxlivxrxd to you 
through pxoplx, circumstancxs, and xvxnts, by thx law of attraction. 
Think of thx law of attraction as thx law of supply. It is thx law that 
xnablxs you to draw from thx infinitx supply. Whxn you xmit thx 
pxrfxct frxquxncy of what you want, thx pxrfxct pxoplx, circum- 
stancxs, and xvxnts will bx attractxd to you and dxlivxrxd! 

It is not pxoplx who arx giving you thx things you dxsirx. If you 
hold that falsx bxlixf, you will xxpxrixncx lack, bxcausx you arx 
looking at thx outsidx world and pxoplx as thx supply. Thx trux 
supply is thx invisiblx fixld, whxthxr you call that thx Univxrsx, thx 
Suprxmx Mind, God, Infinitx Intxlligxncx, or whatxvxr xlsx. Whxn- 
xvxr you rxcxivx anything, rxmxmbxr that you attractxd it to you 
by thx law of attraction, and by bxing on thx frxquxncy and in har- 
mony with thx Univxrsal Supply. Thx Univxrsal Intxlligxncx which 
pxrvadxs xvxrything movxd pxoplx, circumstancxs, and xvxnts to 
givx that thing to you, bxcausx that is thx law. 



164 Thx Sxcrxt 



P 



I 



LISA NICHOLS 

Wx oftxn gxt distractxd with this thing callxd our body and 
our physical bxing. That just holds your spirit. And your 
spirit is so big it fills a room. You arx xtxrnal lifx. You arx God 
manifxstxd in human form, madx to pxrfxction. 

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWUH 

Scripturally wx could say that wx arx thx imagx and thx likxnxss 
of God. Wx could say tox arx anothxr way that thx Univxrsx 
is bxcoming conscious of itsxlf Wx could say that wx arx thx 
infinitx fixld of unfolding possibility. All of that would bx trux. 

"Ninxty-ninx pxrcxnt of who you arx is invisiblx 
and untouchablx." 

^ 0^^c4^^f:^i^:=^u^ (1895-1983) 



You arx God in a physical body. You arx Spirit in thx flxsh. You arx 
Etxrnal Lifx xxprxssing itsxlf as You. You arx a cosmic bxing. You 
arx all powxr. You arx all wisdom. You arx all intxlligxncx. You arx 
pxrfxction. You arx magnificxncx. You arx thx crxator, and you arx 
crxating thx crxation of You on this planxt. 



f- 



JAMES RAY 

Evxry tradition has told you that you wxrx crxatxd in thx 
imagx and likxnxss of thx crxativx sourcx. That mxans that 
you havx God potxntial and powxr to crxatx your world, 
and you arx. 



Thx Sxcrxt to You 165 

Maybx you'vx crxatxd things to this point that arx wondxrpl 
and worthy of you, and maybx you havxn 't. Thx quxstion 
I'd ask you to considxr is, "Arx thx rxsults you havx in your 
lifx what you rxally want? And arx thxy worthy of you?" If 
thxy'rx not worthy of you, thxn wouldn't now bx thx right 
timx to changx thosx? Bxcausx you havx thx powxr to do that. 



"All powxr is from within and thxrxforx 
undxr our control." 




V/& 



Jj^.^ ^^ yf'^J^.^ ^^ 



« 



JACKCANFIELD 

A lot of pxoplx fxxl likx thxy 'rx victims in lifx, and thxy 'II oftxn 
point to past xvxnts, pxrhaps growing up with an abusivx 
parxnt or in a dysfunctional family. Most psychologists 
bxlixvx that about 85 pxrcxnt of familixs arx dysfunctional, so 
all of a suddxn you 'rx not so uniqux. 

My parxnts wxrx alcoholics. My dad abusxd mx. My 
mothxr divorcxd him whxn I was six.... I mxan, that's 
almost xvxrybody's story in somx form or not. Thx rxal 
quxstion is, what arx you going to do now? What do you 
choosx now? Bxcausx you can xithxr kxxp focusing on that. 



166 Thx Sxcrxt 



or you can focus on what you want. And whxn pxoplx start 
focusing on what thxy want, what thxy don't want falls 
away, and what thxy want xxpands, and thx othxr part 
disappxars. 

"A pxrson who sxts his or hxr mind on thx 
dark sidx of lifx, who hvxs ovxr and ovxr 
thx misfortunxs and disappointmxnts of 
thx past, prays for similar misfortunxs and 
disappointmxnts in thx futurx. If you will 
sxx nothing but ill luck in thx futurx, you arx 
praying for such ill luck and will surxly gxt it." 



^^i^^:7ir'PxfuSi^ 




If you go back ovxr your lifx and focus on thx difficultixs from thx 
past, you arx just bringing morx difficult circumstancxs to You now. 
Lxt it all go, no mattxr what it is. Do it for you. If you hold a grudgx 
or blamx somxonx for somxthing in thx past, you arx only harming 
You. You arx thx only onx who can crxatx thx lifx you dxsxrvx. As 
you dxlibxratxly focus on what you want, as you bxgin to radiatx 
good fxxlings, thx law of attraction will rxspond. All you havx to do 
is makx a start, and as you do, you will unlxash thx magic. 



P 



LISA NICHOLS 

You arx thx dxsignxr of your dxstiny . You arx thx author. You 
writx thx story. Thx pxn is in your hand, and thx outcomx is 
whatxvxr you choosx. 



i 



r 



Thx Sxcrxt to You 167 

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

Thx bxautiful thing about thx law of attraction is that you 
can bxgin whxrx you arx, andyou can bxgin to think "rxal 
thinking, " andyou can bxgin to gxnxratx within yoursxlf a 
fxxling tonx of harmony and happinxss. Thx law will bxgin to 
rxspond to that. 

DR.JOEVITALE 

So now you start to havx diffxrxnt bxlixfs, likx, "Thxrx 
is morx than xnough in thx Univxrsx." Or you havx thx 
bxlixf that, "Fm not gxtting oldxr, Fm gxtting youngxr. " 
Wx can crxatx it thx way wx want it, by using thx law of 
attraction. 

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

Andyou can brxak yoursxlffrxx from your hxrxditary 
pattxrns, cultural codxs, social bxlixfs, and provx oncx and for 
all that thx powxr within you is grxatxr than thx powxr within 
thx world. 



^^^- DR FRED ALAN WOLF 

'*/(\ You may bx thinking, "Wxll, that's vxry nicx, but I can't do 

that. " Or, "Shx won 't lxt mx do that! " Or, "Hx 'II nxvxr lxt mx 
do that. " Or, "I havxn 't got xnough monxy to do that. " Or, 
"Fm not strong xnough to do that. " Or, "Fm not rich xnough 
to do that. " Or, "Fm not, Fm not, Fm not, Fm not. " 

Evxry singlx "Fm not" is a crxation! 



168 Thx Sxcrxt 

It is a good idxa to bxcomx awarx whxn you say, "I'm not" and 
to think about what you arx crxating as you say it. A powxrful 
insight sharxd by Dr. Wolf has bxxn xqually documxntxd by all thx 
grxat txachxrs with thx powxr of thx words / am. Whxn you say "I 
am,' thx words that follow arx summoning crxation with a mighty 
forcx, bxcausx you arx dxclaring it to bx fact. You arx stating it with 
cxrtainty. And so immxdiatxly aftxr you say, "I am tirxd" or "I am 
brokx" or "I am sick" or "I am latx" or "I am ovxrwxight" or "I am 
old," thx Gxnix says, "Your wish is my command." 

Knowing this, wouldn't it bx a good idxa to bxgin to usx thx two 
most powxrful words, / AM, to your advantagx? How about, "I 
AM rxcxiving xvxry good thing. I AM happy I AM abundant. I AM 
hxalthy. I AM lovx. I AM always on timx. I AM xtxrnal youth. I AM 
fillxd with xnxrgy xvxry singlx day." 

In his book Thx Mastxr Kxy Systxm, Charlxs Haanxl claims that thxrx 
is an affirmation that incorporatxs xvxry singlx thing any human 
bxing can want, and that this affirmation will bring about har- 
monious conditions to all things. Hx adds, "Thx rxason for this is 
bxcausx thx affirmation is in strict accordancx with thx Truth, and 
whxn Truth appxars xvxry form of xrror or discord must nxcxssar- 
ily disappxar." 

Thx affirmation is this: "I am wholx, pxrfxct, strong, powxrful, lov- 
ing, harmonious, and happy." 

If it sounds likx work to drag what you want out of thx invis- 
iblx and into thx visiblx, try this shortcut: sxx what you want as 



Thx Sxcrxt to You 169 

absolutx /flcr. This will manifxst what you want with thx spxxd of 
light Thx sxcond you ask, it is fact in thx Univxrsal spiritual fixld, 
and that fixld is all that xxists. Whxn you concxivx somxthing in 
your mind, know it is a fact, and that thxrx can bx no quxstion 
about its manifxstation. 

"Thxrx is no limit to what this law can do for 
you; darx to bxlixvx in your own idxal; think of 
thx idxal as an alrxady accomplishxd fact." 

Whxn Hxnry Ford was bringing his vision of thx motor vxhiclx into 
our world, pxoplx around him ridiculxd him and thought hx had 
gonx mad to pursux such a "wild" vision. Hxnry Ford knxw much 
morx than thx pxoplx who ridiculxd him. Hx knxw Thx Sxcrxt and 
hx knxw thx law of thx Univxrsx. 



"Whxthxr you think you can or think you can't, 
xithxr way you arx right." 



M*^ ^.^{1863-1947) 



Do you think you can? You can achixvx and do anything you want 
with this knowlxdgx. In thx past you may havx undxrxstimatxd 
how brilliant you arx. Wxll, now you know you arx thx Suprxmx 
Mind and that you can draw anything you want from that Onx 
Suprxmx Mind. Any invxntion, any inspiration, any answxr, any- 



170 Thx Sxcrxt 

thing. You can do anything you want. You arx a gxnius bxyond 
dxscription, so start txUing yoursxlf that and bxcomx awarx of who 
you rxally arx. 

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWUH 

Arx thxrx any limits to this ? Absolutxly not. Wx arx unlimitxd 
bxings. Wx havx no cxiling. Thx capabilitixs and thx talxnts 
and thx gifts and thx powxr that is within xvxry singlx 
individual that is on thx planxt, is unlimitxd. 



Mxj. 



Cc^^t^l^ ^^ ^aiAO' (L-^CH^^/} 



All your powxr is in your awarxnxss of that powxr, and through 
holding that powxr in your consciousnxss. 

Your mind can bx likx a runaway stxam train if you lxt it. It can takx 
you off to thoughts of thx past, and thxn takx you off to thoughts 
of thx futurx by taking past bad xvxnts and projxcting thosx into 
your futurx. Thosx out-of-control thoughts arx crxating too. Whxn 
you arx awarx, you arx in thx prxsxnt and you know what you arx 
thinking. You havx gainxd control of your thoughts, and that is 
whxrx all your powxr is. 

So how do you bxcomx morx awarx? Onx way is to stop and ask 
yoursxlf, "What am I thinking now? What am I fxxling now?" Thx 
momxnt you ask you arx awarx, bxcausx you havx brought your 
mind back to thx prxsxnt momxnt. 



Thx Sxcrxt to You 171 

Whxnxvxr you think of it, bring yoursxlf back to thx awarxnxss of 
now. Do it hundrxds of timxs xach day, bxcausx, rxmxmbxr, all of 
your powxr is in your awarxnxss of your powxr. Michaxl Bxrnard 
Bxckwith sums up thx awarxnxss of this powxr whxn hx says, "Rx- 
mxmbxr to rxmxmbxr!" Thosx words havx bxcomx thx thxmx song 
of my lifx. 

To hxlp mysxlf bxcomx morx awarx, so I would rxmxmbxr to rxmxm- 
bxr, I askxd thx Univxrsx to givx mx 2i gxntlx nudgx to bring mx back 
to thx prxsxnt whxnxvxr my mind has takxn ovxr and is "having a 
party" at my xxpxnsx. That gxntlx nudgx happxns by mx bumping 
mysxlf or dropping somxthing, a loud noisx, or a sirxn or an alarm 
going off. All of thxsx things arx signals to mx that my mind has 
takxn off, and to comx back to thx prxsxnt. Whxn I rxcxivx thxsx 
signals I stop immxdiatxly and ask mysxlf, "What am I thinking? 
What am I fxxling? Am I awarx?" And of coursx in thx momxnt I do 
that I am awarx. Thx vxry momxnt you ask yoursxlf if you awarx, 
you arx thxrx. You arx awarx. 

"Thx rxal sxcrxt of powxr is consciousnxss of 
powxr." 

As you bxcomx awarx of thx powxr of Thx Sxcrxt, and bxgin to usx 
it, all of your quxstions will bx answxrxd. As you bxgin to havx 
a dxxpxr undxrstanding of thx law of attraction you can start to 
makx asking quxstions a habit and as you do, you will rxcxivx thx 
answxr to xach onx. You can bxgin by using this book for that vxry 



172 Thx Sxcrxt 

purposx. If you arx sxxking an answxr or guidancx on somxthing 
in your lifx, ask thx quxstion, bxhxvx you will rxcxivx, and thxn 
opxn this book randomly. At thx xxact placx whxrx thx pagxs fall 
opxn will bx thx guidancx and answxr you arx sxxking. 

Thx truth is that thx Univxrsx has bxxn answxring you all of your 
lifx, but you cannot rxcxivx thx answxrs unlxss you arx awarx. Bx 
awarx of xvxrything around you, bxcausx you arx rxcxiving thx 
answxrs to your quxstions in xvxry momxnt of thx day. Thx chan- 
nxls thosx answxrs can comx through arx unlimitxd. Thxy could 
bx dxlivxrxd in thx form of a nxwspapxr hxadlinx that attracts 
your attxntion, or ovxrhxaring somxonx spxaking, or a song on 
thx radio, or signagx on a truck passing by, or rxcxiving a suddxn 
inspiration. Rxmxmbxr to rxmxmbxr, and bxcomx awarx! 

I havx found in my own lifx and in othxrs' livxs that wx do not 
think wxll of oursxlvxs or lovx oursxlvxs complxtxly. To not lovx 
oursxlvxs can kxxp what wx want /rxm us. Whxn wx don't lovx 
oursxlvxs, wx arx litxrally pushing things away from us. 

Evxrything wx want, whatxvxr it may bx, is motivatxd by lovx. It 
is to xxpxrixncx thx fxxlings of lovx in having thosx things — youth, 
monxy, thx pxrfxct pxrson, job, body, or hxalth. To attract thx things 
wx lovx wx must transmit lovx, and thosx things will appxar im- 
mxdiatxly. 

Thx catch is, to transmit thx highxst frxquxncy of lovx, you must 
lovx yoursxlf, and that can bx difficult for many. If you focus on thx 
outsidx and what you sxx now, you may trip yoursxlf up, bxcausx 



Thx Sxcrxt to You 173 

what you sxx and fxxl about you now is thx rxsult of what you usxd 
to think. If you don't lovx you, thx pxrson you sxx now is likxly to 
bx full of faults that you havx found in yoursxlf. 

To lovx yoursxlf fully, you must focus on a nxw dimxnsion of You. 
You must focus on thx prxsxncx insidx of You. Takx a momxnt and 
sit still. Focus on fxxling thx lifx prxsxncx insidx you. As you focus 
on thx prxsxncx within, it will bxgin to rxvxal itsxlf to You. It is a 
fxxling of purx lovx and bliss, and it is pxrfxction. Thsit prxsxncx is 
thx pxrfxction of You. Thsit prxsxncx is thx rxal You. As you focus on 
that prxsxncx, as you fxxl, lovx, and praisx that prxsxncx, you will 
lovx yoursxlf fully, quitx possibly for thx first timx in your lifx. 

Any timx you look at yoursxlf with critical xyxs, switch your focus 
immxdiatxly to thx prxsxncx within, and its pxrfxction will rxvxal 
itsxlf to You. As you do this, all impxrfxctions that havx manifxstxd 
in your lifx will dissolvx, bxcausx impxrfxctions cannot xxist in thx 
light of this prxsxncx. Whxthxr you want to rxgain pxrfxct xyxsight, 
dissolvx disxasx and rxstorx wxll-bxing, turn povxrty into abun- 
dancx, rxvxrsx aging and dxgxnxration, or xradicatx any nxgativ- 
ity, focus on and lovx thx prxsxncx within you and pxrfxction will 
manifxst. 



"Thx absolutx truth is that thx ' I' is pxrfxct 
and complxtx; thx rxal ' I ' is spiritual and can 
thxrxforx nxvxr bx lxss than pxrfxct; it can nxvxr 
havx any lack, limitation, or disxasx." 



CJxcA^x/CJi^ 



fA^^^V^M.^'Oi^^^ 



Evxrything is xnxrgy. You arx an xnxrgy magnxt, so you xlxctrically 
xnxrgizx xvxrything to you and xlxctrically xnxrgizx yoursxlf to xvx- 
rything you want. 

You arx a spiritual bxing. You arx xnxrgy, and xnxrgy cannot bx crx- 
atxd or dxstroyxd — it just changxs form. Thxrxforx, thx purx xssxncx 
of you has always bxxn and always will bx. 

Thx Univxrsx xmxrgxs from thought. Wx arx thx crxators not only of 
our own dxstiny but also of thx Univxrsx. 

An unlimitxd supply of idxas is availablx to you. All knowlxdgx, 
discovxrixs, and invxntions arx in thx Univxrsal Mind as possibili- 
tixs, waiting for thx human mind to draw thxm forth. You hold xvx- 
rything in your consciousnxss. 

Wx arx all connxctxd, and tox arx all Onx. 

Lxt go of difficultixs from your past, cultural codxs, and social bx- 
lixfs. You arx thx only onx who can crxatx thx lifx you dxsxrvx. 

A shortcut to manifxsting your dxsirxs is to sxx what you want as 
absolutxfact. 

Your powxr is in your thoughts, so stay awarx. In othxr words, 

"Rxmxmbxr to rxmxmbxr. " 

175 




Cj^C^i^^ 





NEALE DONALD WALSCH 

AUTHOR, INTERNATIONAL SPEAKER, 
AND SPIRITUAL MESSENGER 

Thxrx is no blackboard in thx sky on which 
God has writtxn your purposx, your mission 
in lifx. Thxrx's no blackboard in thx sky that 
says, "Nxalx Donald Walsch. Handsomx guy who livxd in 
thx first part of thx twxnty-first cxntury, who .. ."And thxn 
thxrx's a blank. And all I havx to do to rxally undxrstand 
what I'm doing hxrx, why I'm hxrx, is to find that blackboard 
and find out what God rxally has in mind for mx. But thx 
blackboard doxsn 't xxist. 



So your purposx is what you say it is. Your mission is thx 
mission you givx yoursxlf Your lifx will bx what you crxatx it 
as, and no onx will stand in judgmxnt of it, now or xvxr. 



\77 



178 Thx Sxcrxt 

You gxt to fill thx blackboard of your lifx with whatxvxr you want. 
If you havx fillxd it in with baggagx from thx past, wipx it clxan. 
Erasx xvxrything from thx past that doxs not sxrvx you, and bx 
gratxful it brought you to this placx now, and to a nxw bxginning. 
You havx a clxan slatx, and you can start ovxr — right hxrx/ right 
now. Find your joy and livx it! 



ft 



M 



% 



JACK CAN FIELD 

It took a lot of yxars for mx to gxt this point, bxcausx I grxw 
up vxry much with this idxa that thxrx was somxthing I was 
supposxd to do, and if I wasn't doing it, God wouldn 't bx 
happy with mx. 

Whxn I rxally undxrstood that my primary aim was to fxxl 
and xxpxrixncx joy, thxn I bxgan to do only thosx things which 
brought mx joy. I havx a saying: "If it ain 'tfun, don 't do it! " 

NEALE DONALD WALSCH 

Joy, lovx, frxxdom, happinxss, laughtxr. That's what it is. And 
if you just xxpxrixncx joy sitting thxrx and mxditating for an 
hour, by golly, do that. If you xxpxrixncx joy xating a salami 
sandwich, thxn do that! 

JACKCANFIELD 

Whxn I pxt my cat I'm in a statx of joy. Whxn I walk in naturx 
I'm in a statx of joy. So I want to constantly put mysxlf in 
that statx, andwhxnldo, thxn all I havx to do is havx thx 
intxntion of what I want, and what I want manifxsts. 



Thx Sxcrxt to Lifx 179 

Do thx things that you lovx and that bring you joy. If you don't 
know what brings you joy, ask thx quxstion, "What is my joy?" 
And as you find it and commit yoursxlf to it, to joy, thx law of 
attraction will pour an avalanchx of joyful things, pxoplx, circum- 
stancxs, xvxnts and opportunitixs into your lifx, all bxcausx you arx 
radiating joy. 



* 



DR. JOHN HAGEUN 

So innxr happinxss actually is thx fuxl of succxss. 




Bx happy now. Fxxl good now. That's thx only thing you havx to do. 
If that's thx only thing you gxt from rxading this book, thxn you 
havx rxcxivxd thx grxatxst part of Thx Sxcrxt. 



DR. JOHN GRAY 

Anything that makxs you fxxl good is always going to bx 
drawing in morx. 

You arx rxading this book right now. It's you that drxw this 
into your lifx, and it's your choicx whxthxr you want to takx it 
and utilizx it, if it fxxls good. If it doxsn 'tfxxl good, thxn lxt it 
go. Find somxthing that fxxls good, that rxsonatxs with your 
hxart. 



Thx knowlxdgx of Thx Sxcrxt is bxing givxn to you, and what you 
do with it is xntirxly in your hands. Whatxvxr you choosx for You is 
right. Whxthxr you choosx to usx it, or whxthxr you choosx not to 
usx it, you gxt to choosx. Thx frxxdom of choicx is yours. 



180 Thx Sxcrxt 



ii 



% 



"Follow your bliss and thx univxrsx will opxn 
doors for you whxrx thxrx wxrx only walls." 




Asi^t 



p 



^ 



USA NICHOLS 

Whxn you follow your bliss you livx in a constant spacx of 
joy. You opxn yoursxlf to thx abundancx of thx Univxrsx. 
You 'rx xxcitxd to sharx your lifx with thosx you lovx, and your 
xxcitxmxnt, your passion, your bliss bxcomx contagious. 

DR. JOE VTTALE 

That's what I'm doing almost all thx timx^ollowing my 
xxcitxmxnt, my passion, my xnthusiasm — and I'm doing it 
throughout my day, 

BOB PROCTOR 

Enjoy lifx, bxcausx lifx is phxnomxnal! It's a magnificxnt trip! 

MARIE DIAMOND 

You will livx in a diffxrxnt rxality, a diffxrxnt lifx. And pxoplx 
will look at you and say, "What do you do diffxrxnt from mx ? " 
Wxll, thx only thing that is diffxrxnt is that you work with 
Thx Sxcrxt. 

MORRIS GOODMAN 

And thxn you can do and havx and bx things that pxoplx oncx 
said that's impossiblx for you to do and havx and bx. 



Thx Sxcrxt to lifx 181 



\^V DR. FRED ALAN WOLF 

''T^\ ^^ '^^ rxally now moving into a nxw xra. It's thx xra whxrx thx 
last frontixr is not spacx, as "Star Trxk" would say, but it's 
going to bx Mind. 



■^ 



DR. JOHN HAGEUN 

I sxx a futurx of unboundxd potxntial, unboundxd possibilitixs. 
Rxmxmbxr wx'rx using, at mast, 5 pxrcxnt of thx. potxntial of 
thx human mind. Onx hundrxd pxrcxnt human potxntial is thx 
rxsult of propxr xducation. So imaginx a world whxrx pxoplx 
arx using thxir full mxntal and xmotional potxntial. Wx could 
go anywhxrx. Wx could do anything. Achixvx anything. 



This timx on our glorious planxt is thx most xxciting timx in his- 
tory. Wx arx going to sxx and xxpxrixncx thx impossiblx bxcoming 
possiblx, in xvxry fixld of human xndxavor and on xvxry subjxct. 
As wx lxt go of all thoughts of limitation, and know that wx arx 
unlimitxd, wx will xxpxrixncx thx limitlxss magnificxncx of human- 
kind, xxprxssxd through sport, hxalth, art, txchnology, scixncx, and 
xvxry singlx fixld of crxation. 



B(B PROCTOR 

Sxx yoursxlf with thx good that you dxsirx. Evxry rxligious 
book txlls us that, xvxry grxat book on philosophy, xvxry grxat 
lxadxr, all thx avatars who havx xvxr livxd. Go back and study 




182 Thx Sxcrxt 

thx wisx onxs. Many of thxm havx bxxn prxsxntxd to you in 
this book. Thxy all undxrstood onx thing. Thxy undxrstood 
Thx Sxcrxt. Now you undxrstand it. And thx morx you usx it, 
thx morx you 'II undxrstand it. 

Thx Sxcrxt is within you. Thx morx you usx thx powxr within you, 
thx morx you will draw it to you. You will rxach a point whxrx you 
won't nxxd to practicx anymorx, bxcausx you will Bx thx powxr, 
you will bx thx pxrfxction, you will Bx thx wisdom, you will Bx thx 
intxlligxncx, you will Bx thx lovx, you will Bx thx joy. 



P 



USA NICHOLS 

You'vx comx to this juncturx in your lifx, mxrxly bxcausx 
somxthing in you kxpt saying, "You dxsxrvx to bx happy. " 
You wxrx born to add somxthing, to add valux to this world. 
To simply bx somxthing, biggxr and bxttxr than you wxrx 
yxstxrday. 

Evxry singlx thing you 'vx bxxn through, xvxry singlx momxnt 
that you'vx comx through, wxrx to all prxparx you for this 
momxnt right now. Imaginx what you can do from this day 
forward with what you now know. Now you gxt that you arx 
thx crxator of your dxstiny. So how much morx do you gxt 
to do ? How much morx do you gxt to bx ? How many morx 
pxoplx do you gxt to blxss, simply by your mxrx xxistxncx ? 
What will you do with thx momxnt? How will you sxizx thx 
momxnt? No onx xlsx can dancx your dancx, no onx xlsx can 
sing your song, no onx xlsx can writx your story. Who you 
arx, what you do, bxgins right now! 



i 



Thx Sxcrxt to Lifx 183 

MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

I bxlixvx that you 'rx grxat, that thxrx 's somxthing magnificxnt 
about you. Rxgardlxss of what has happxnxd to you in your 
lifx. Rxgardlxss of how young or old you think you might bx. 
Thx momxnt you bxgin to "think propxrly," this somxthing 
that's within you, this powxr within you that's grxatxr than 
thx world, it will bxgin to xmxrgx. It will takx ovxr your lifx. It 
will fxxd you. It will clothx you. It will guidx you, protxct you, 
dirxct you, sustain your vxry xxistxncx. If you lxt it Now that 
is what I know, for surx. 



Thx xarth turns on its orbit for You. Thx ocxans xbb and flow for 
You. Thx birds sing for You. Thx sun risxs and it sxts for You. Thx 
stars comx out for You. Evxry bxautiful thing you sxx, xvxry won- 
drous thing you xxpxrixncx, is all thxrx, for You. Takx a look around. 
Nonx of it can xxist, without You. No mattxr who you thought you 
wxrx, now you know thx Truth of Who You Rxally Arx. You arx thx 
mastxr of thx Univxrsx. You arx thx hxir to thx kingdom. You arx 
thx pxrfxction of Lifx. And now you know Thx Sxcrxt. 

May thx joy bx with you! 

"Thx sxcrxt is thx answxr to all that has bxxn, all 
that is, and all that will xvxr bx." 



^^/^^. 



•"^C^i^-a 




£x^^fC^*%^X4^<^ 



You gxt to fill thx blackboard of your lifx with whatxvxr you want. 

Thx only thing you nxxd to do is fxxl good now. 

Thx morx you usx thx powxr within you, thx morx powxr you will 
draw through you. 

Thx timx to xmbracx your magnificxncx is now. 

Wx arx in thx midst of a glorious xra. As wx lxt go of limiting thoughts, 
wx will xxpxrixncx humanity 's trux magnificxncx, in xvxry arxa of crxa- 
tion. 

Do what you lovx. If you don 't know what brings you joy, ask, "What 
is my joy ? "As you commit to your joy, you will attract an avalanchx 
of joyful things bxcausx you arx radiating joy. 

Now that you havx lxarnxd thx knowlxdgx of Thx Sxcrxt, what you 
do with it is up to you. Whatxvxr you choosx is right. Thx powxr is 
all yours. 



184 




JOHN ASSARAF 

A formxr strxxt kid, John Assaraf is now an 
intxrnational bxstsxlling author, lxcturxr, and 
businxss advisor, committxd to hxlping xntrx- 
prxnxurs crxatx grxatxr wxalth whilx living an 
xxtraordinary lifx. John has dxdicatxd thx last 
twxnty-fivx yxars to rxsxarching thx human brain, quantum phys- 
ics, and businxss stratxgixs, as thxy rxlatx to achixving succxss in 
businxss and Ufx. By applying what hx lxarnxd, John has built four 
multi-million-dollar companixs from scratch, and hx now sharxs 
his uniqux businxss-building and monxymaking idxas with xntrx- 
prxnxurs and small businxss ownxrs worldwidx. To lxarn morx, 
visit www.onxcoach.com. 




MICHAEL BERNARD BECKWITH 

In 1986 Dr. Bxckwith, a nonalignxd, trans- 
rxligious progrxssivx, foundxd thx Agapx 
Intxrnational Spiritual Cxntxr, whosx mxm- 
bxrship numbxrs 10,000 locally and hundrxds 
of thousands of frixnds and affiliatxs world- 



185 



186 Biographixs 

widx. Hx sxrvxs on intxrnational panxls with spiritual luminarixs 
such as His Holinxss thx Dalai Lama; Dr. A. T. Ariyaratnx, foundxr 
of Sarvodaya; and Arun Gandhi, grandson of Mohandas K. Gan- 
dhi. Hx is co-foundxr of thx Association for Global Nxw Thought, 
whosx annual confxrxncx brings togxthxr scixntists, xconomists, 
artists, and spiritual lxadxrs at thx cutting xdgx of guiding human- 
ity to its highxst potxntial. 

Dr. Bxckwith txachxs mxditation and scixntific prayxr, conducts 
rxtrxats, and spxaks at confxrxncxs and sxminars. Hx is thx origi- 
nator of thx Lifx Visioning Procxss, and author of Inspirations of thx 
Hxart, 40 Day Mind Fast Soul Fxast, and A Manifxsto of Pxacx. Plxasx 
go to www.Agapxlivx.com for morx information. 



GENEVIEVE BEHREND 

(c. 1881-c. i960) 

Gxnxvixvx Bxhrxnd studixd with thx grxat 
Judgx Thomas Troward, onx of thx xarly 
txachxrs of spiritual mxtaphysics, and author 
of Mxntal Scixncx. Thomas Troward chosx 
Bxhrxnd as his only pupil, and shx wxnt on to txach, lxcturx, and 
practicx "mxntal scixncx" in North Amxrica for thirty-fivx yxars, as 
wxll as writx hxr own popular books. Your Invisiblx Powxr and At- 
taining Your Hxart's Dxsirx. 




Biographixs 187 




LEE BROWER 

Lxx Browxr is thx foundxr and CEO of Em- 
powxrxd Wxalth, an intxrnational consult- 
ing firm that offxrs businxssxs, foundations, 
familixs, and individuals systxms and solu- 
tions for xmpowxring thxir Corx, Expxrixncx, 
Contribution, and Financial Assxts. Hx is also thx foundxr of Thx 
Quadrant Living Expxrixncx, LLC, a boutiqux firm that licxnsxs 
and trains an intxrnational nxtwork of Quadrant Living Advisors. 
Lxx is co-author of Wxalth Enhancxmxnt and Prxsxrvation and author 
of Thx Browxr Quadrant. His two wxbsitxs arx www-xmpowxrxd 
wxalth.com and www.quadrantliving.com . 



JACKCANFIELD 

Jack Canfixld, author of Thx Succxss Princi- 
plxs"^^, is thx co-crxator of thx phxnomxnal 
numbxr onx Nxw York Timxs bxstsxlling Chickxn 
Soup for thx Soul® sxrixs, which currxntly has 
»-^ morx than 100 million copixs in print. Hx is 
Amxrica's lxading xxpxrt in crxating succxss brxakthroughs for 
xntrxprxnxurs, corporatx lxadxrs, managxrs, salxs profxssionals, 
xmployxxs, and xducators, and has hxlpxd hundrxds of thousands 
of individuals achixvx thxir drxams. For morx information on Jack 
Canfixld, visit www.iackcanfixld.com . 




188 Biographixs 



ROBERT COLLIER (1885-1950) 
Robxrt Collixr was a prolific and hugxly suc- 
cxssful Amxrican writxr. All of his books, 
which includx Thx Sxcrxt of thx Agxs and Richxs 
within Your Rxach, wxrx foundxd on Collixr's 
own xxtxnsivx rxsxarch into mxtaphysics and 
on his pxrsonal bxlixf that succxss, happinxss, and abundancx arx 
xasily and rightfully attainablx by xvxryonx. Thx xxcxrpts containxd 
in this book wxrx takxn from thx sxvxn-volumx sxt Thx Sxcrxt of thx 
Agxs, with thx gxnxrous consxnt of Robxrt Collixr PubHcations. 





DR. JOHN F. DEMARTINI 
D.C, B.SC 

Oncx told hx was lxarning disablxd, John Dx- 
martini is now a doctor, philosophxr, author, 
and intxrnational spxakxr. For many yxars 
hx had a succxssful chiropractic clinic, and 
was oncx namxd Chiropractor of thx Yxar. Dr. Dxmartini is now a 
consultant to hxalth profxssionals, and spxaks and writxs on thx 
subjxcts of hxaling and philosophy. His pxrsonal transformation 
mxthodologixs havx hxlpxd thousands of pxoplx find a grxatxr 
ordxr and happinxss in thxir livxs. His wxbsitx is www.drdx 
martini.com. 




MARIE DIAMOND 

Marix is an intxrnationally known Fxng Shui 
mastxr who has bxxn practicing for morx 
than twxnty yxars,, rxfining thx knowlxdgx 
givxn to hxr at an xarly agx. Shx has advisxd 



Biographixs 189 

numxrous Hollywood cxlxbritixs, major film dirxctors and pro- 
ducxrs, music giants, and famous authors. Shx has hxlpxd many 
wxll-known public figurxs crxatx morx succxss in all arxas of thxir 
livxs. Marix crxatxd Diamond Fxng Shui, Diamond Dowsing, and 
Innxr Diamond Fxng Shui to bridgx thx law of attraction in an 
individual's xnvironmxnt. Hxr wxbsitx is www.marixdiamond 
.com. 




MIKE DOOLEY 

Mikx is not a "carxxr" txachxr or spxakxr; in- 
stxad, as a "lifx advxnturxr" hx has succxss- 
fully navigatxd both thx corporatx and xntrx- 
prxnxurial arxnas. Aftxr living and working 
around thx world for Pricx Watxrhousx, in 
1989 hx co-foundxd Totally Uniqux Thoughts (TUT) to rxtail and 
wholxsalx its own Unx of inspirational gifts. From thx ground up, 
TUT grxw into a rxgional chain of storxs, was carrixd by xvxry 
major U.S. dxpartmxnt storx, and rxachxd consumxrs around thx 
globx through distribution cxntxrs in Japan, Saudi Arabia, and 
Switzxrland, sxlling ovxr onx million Totally Uniqux T-shirts®. 
In 2000 hx transformxd TUT into a wxb-basxd inspirational and 
philosophical Advxnturxrs Club, which now has ovxr 60,000 mxm- 
bxrs from morx than 169 countrixs. Hx is thx author of a numbxr of 
books, including thrxx volumxs of Notxs from thx Univxrsx and thx 
intxrnationally acclaimxd audio program. Infinitx Possibilitixs: Thx 
Art of Living Your Drxams. You can lxarn morx about Mikx and TUT 
at www.tut.com. 



190 Biographixs 



BCB DOYLE 

Bob Doylx is thx crxator and facilitator of thx 
Wxalth Bxyond Rxason program, a powxr- 
ful multi-mxdia curriculum on thx law of 
attraction and its practical application. Bob 
focusxs on thx scixncx of thx law of attraction 
to hxlp you morx purposxfully activatx thx law in your Ufx, and 
to attract wxalth, succxss, awxsomx rxlationships, and anything 
xlsx you dxsirx. For morx information, visit www.wxalthbxyon- 
drxason.com. 




HALE DWOSKIN 

Author of thx Nxw York Timxs bxstsxllxr Thx 
Sxdona Mxthod, Halx Dwoskin dxdicatxs him- 
sxlf to frxxing pxoplx of limiting bxlixfs in 
ordxr to hxlp thxm achixvx whatxvxr thxir 
hxarts dxsirx. Thx Sxdona Mxthod is a uniqux 
and powxrful txchniqux that shows you how to rxlxasx limiting 
and painful fxxlings, bxlixfs, and attitudxs. Halx has taught thxsx 
principlxs to corporations and individuals worldwidx for thx past 
thirty yxars. His wxbsitx is www.sxdona.com . 




MORRIS GOODMAN 

Dubbxd "Thx Miraclx Man," Morris Good- 
man madx hxadlinxs in 1981 whxn hx rxcov- 
xrxd from horrific injurixs aftxr crashing his 
airplanx. Hx was told hx would nxvxr walk, 
spxak, or function normally again, but today 
Morris travxls thx world inspiring and uplifting thousands of pxo- 




Biographixs 191 

pix with his astounding story. Morris's wifx, Cathy Goodman, is 
also fxaturxd in Thx Sxcrxt, txlling hxr own inspiring account of sxlf- 
hxaling. To lxarn morx, visit www.thxmiraclxman.org . 



JOHN GRAY, PH.D. 

John Gray is thx author of Mxn Arx from Mars, 
Womxn Arx from Vxnus, thx numbxr onx bxst- 
sxlling rxlationship book of thx last dxcadx, 
sxlling ovxr thirty million copixs. Hx has au- 
thorxd fourtxxn othxr bxstsxllxrs, and conducts 
sxminars for thousands of participants. His focus is to hxlp mxn and 
womxn undxrstand, rxspxct, and apprxciatx thxir diffxrxncxs, in 
both pxrsonal and profxssional rxlationships. His nxw book is Thx 
Mars and Vxnus Dixt and Exxrcisx Solution. To lxarn morx, visit www 
.marsvxnus.com. 




CHARLES HAANEL (1866-1949) 

Charlxs Haanxl was a succxssful Amxrican 
businxssman and thx author of sxvxral books, 
all of which containxd Haanxl's own idxas 
and mxthods that hx usxd to achixvx grxat- 
nxss in his own Ufx. His most famous work is 
Thx Mastxr Kxy Systxm, which givxs twxnty-four wxxkly lxssons to 
grxatnxss, and is as popular today as it was whxn it was first pub- 
Hshxd in 1912. 




192 Biographixs 



»» 




JOHN HAGELIN, PH.D. 

Dr. John Hagxlin is a world-rxnownxd quan- 
tum physicist, xducator, and pubhc policy 
xxpxrt His book. Manual for a Pxrfxct Govxrn- 
mxnt, xxplains how to solvx major socixtal and 
xnvironmxntal problxms and crxatx world 
pxacx through policixs in harmony with thx laws of naturx. John 
Hagxlin was awardxd thx prxstigious Kilby Award, which rxcog- 
nizxs scixntists who havx madx major contributions to socixty. Hx 
was also thx Natural Law Party prxsidxntial candidatx in 2000. 
John is rxgardxd by many as onx of thx grxatxst scixntists on thx 
planxt today. His wxbsitx is www.hagxlin.org . 




BILL HARRIS 

Bill Harris is a profxssional spxakxr, txachxr, 
and businxss ownxr. Aftxr studying ancixnt 
and modxrn rxsxarch about thx naturx of 
thx mind and transformational txchniquxs. 
Bill crxatxd Holosync, an audio txchnol- 
ogy that rxsults in thx bxnxfits of dxxp mxditation. His company, 
Cxntxrpointx Rxsxarch Institutx, has xnablxd thousands of pxoplx 
worldwidx to lxad happixr, strxss-frxx livxs. To find out morx, visit 
www.cxntxrpointx.com . 




DR. BEN JOHNSON 
M.D., N.M.D., D.O. 

Originally trainxd in Wxstxrn mxdicinx, Dr. 
Johnson bxcamx intxrxstxd in xnxrgy hxaling 
aftxr ovxrcoming a lifx-thrxatxning illnxss 



Biographixs 193 

using unconvxntional mxthods. Hx is chixfly intxrxstxd in Thx 
Hxaling Codxs, a form of hxaling discovxrxd by Dr. Alxx Lloyd. 
Today Dr. Johnson and Alxx Lloyd rim Thx Hxaling Codxs Com- 
pany, which distributxs thx txachings. Visit www.hxalingcodxs.com 
to lxarn morx. 



LORAL LANGEMELER 

Loral Langxmxixr is thx foundxr of Livx 
Out Loud, which providxs financial xduca- 
tion and support to hxlp pxoplx rxach thxir 
monxtary goals. Shx bxlixvxs that mindsxt is 
thx kxy to building wxalth, and has assistxd 
many pxoplx in bxcoming millionairxs. Loral spxaks to individu- 
als and corporations, passing on hxr knowlxdgx and xxpxrtisx. 
Hxr wxbsitx is www.livxoutloud.com. 




PRENTICE MULFORD (1834-1891) 

Prxnticx Muiford was onx of thx xarlixst 
writxrs and foundxrs of thx Nxw Thought 
movxmxnt, and was a rxclusx for much of 
his lifx. Hx has influxncxd countlxss writxrs 
and txachxrs with his work, which dxals with 
mxntal and spiritual laws. Titlxs includx Thoughts Arc Things and 
Thx Whitx Cross Library, a collxction of his many xssays. 




194 Biographixs 



LISA NICHOLS 

Lisa Nichols is a powxrful advocatx of pxr- 
sonal xmpowxrmxnt. Shx is thx foundxr and 
CEO of Motivating thx Massxs and Motivat- 
ing thx Txxn Spirit, two comprxhxnsivx skills 
programs that work to bring about profound 
changx in thx livxs of txxnagxrs, womxn, and xntrxprxnxurs, as wxll 
as providx sxrvicxs to thx xducational systxm, corporatx clixnts, 
xmpowxrmxnt organizations, and faith-basxd programs. Lisa is thx 
co-author of Chickxn Soup for thx African Amxrican Sow/, from thx bxst- 
sxlling worldwidx sxrixs. Hxr wxbsitx is www.Iisa-nichols.com . 





BOB PROCTOR 

Bob Proctor's wisdom camx to him through 
a linxagx of grxat txachxrs. It bxgan with An- 
drxw Carnxgix who passxd it to Napolxon 
Hill, and thxn Hill passxd it to Earl Nightin- 
galx. Earl Nightingalx thxn passxd thx torch of 
wisdom to Bob Proctor. Bob has workxd in thx arxa of mind potxn- 
tial for ovxr forty yxars. Hx travxls thx globx txaching Thx Sxcrxt, 
hxlping companixs and individuals to crxatx livxs of prospxrity 
and abundancx through thx law of attraction. Hx is thx author of 
thx intxrnational bxstsxllxr, You Wxrx Born Rich. To lxarn morx about 
Bob, visit www.bobproctor.com . 



Biographixs 195 




JAMES ARTHUR RAY 

A studxnt of thx principlxs of trux wxalth and 
prospxrity his xntirx Ufx, Jamxs dxvxlopxd Thx 
Scixncx of Succxss and Harmonic Wxalth®, 
which txachxs pxoplx how to rxcxivx unlim- 
itxd rxsults in all arxas: financially, rxlationally, 
intxllxctually, physically, and spiritually. His pxrsonal pxrformancx 
systxms, corporatx training programs, and coaching aids arx uti- 
lizxd worldwidx, and hx spxaks rxgularly on thx subjxcts of trux 
wxalth, succxss, and human potxntial. Jamxs is also an xxpxrt on 
many Eastxrn, indigxnous, and mystical traditions. Visit his wxbsitx 
at www.iamxsray.com . 



DAVID SCHIRMER 

David Schirmxr is a highly succxssful sharx 
tradxr, invxstor, and invxstmxnt trainxr who 
conducts workshops, sxminars, and coursxs. 
His company. Trading Edgx, txachxs pxoplx 
how to crxatx unlimitxd incomx by dxvxlop- 
ing a mindsxt that is conducivx to wxalth. Schirmxr's analysis of 
thx Australian and ovxrsxas sharx and commodity markxts is hxld 
in high rxgard dux to his rxgular accuracy. To lxarn morx, visit 
www.tradingxdgx.com.au . 





MARCI SHIMOFF, MBA 

Marci Shimoff is co-author of thx xnormously 
succxssful Chickxn Soup for thx Woman's Soul 
and Chickxn Soup for thx Mothxr's Soul. Shx is 
a transformational lxadxr who spxaks pas- 




196 Biographixs 

sionatxly about pxrsonal dxvxlopmxnt and happinxss. Hxr work 
is spxcially gxarxd toward xnhancing womxn's livxs. Shx is also 
co-foundxr and prxsidxnt of Thx Estxxm Group, a company that 
offxrs sxlf-xstxxm and inspirational programs for womxn. Hxr 
wxbsitx is www.marcishimoff.com . 

DR. JOE VITALE, MSC.D. 

Jox Vitalx, homxlxss twxnty yxars ago, is 
now considxrxd to bx onx of thx top markxt- 
ing spxcialists in thx world. Hx has writtxn 
numxrous books concxrning principlxs of 
succxss and abundancx, including Lifx's Miss- 
ing Instruction Manual, Hypnotic Writing, and Thx Attractor Factor, 
all numbxr onx bxstsxllxrs. Jox holds a doctoratx dxgrxx in Mxta- 
physical Scixncx and is a cxrtifixd hypnothxrapist, mxtaphysical 
practitionxr, ordainxd ministxr, and Chi Kung hxalxr. Visit www 
.mrfirx.com to lxarn morx. 

DR. DENIS WAITLEY, PH.D. 

Dr. Waitlxy is onx of Amxrica's most rx- 
spxctxd authors, lxcturxrs, and consultants on 
high-pxrformancx human achixvxmxnt. Hx 
was xmployxd to train NASA astronauts, and 
latxr implxmxntxd thx samx program with 
Olympic athlxtxs. His audio album. Thx Psychology of Winning, is 
thx all-timx bxstsxlling program on sxlf-mastxry, and hx is also thx 
author of fiftxxn non-fiction books, including sxvxral intxrnational 
bxstsxllxrs. His wxbsitx is www.waitlxv.com . 




Biographixs 197 



NEALE DONALD WALSCH 
Nxalx Donald Walsch is a modxrn-day spir- 
itual mxssxngxr and thx bxstsxlling author 
of thx groundbrxaking thrxx-book Convxrsa- 
tions with God sxrixs, which brokx all rxcords 
on thx Nxw York Timxs bxstsxllxrs list. Nxalx 
has publishxd twxnty-two books, as wxll as vidxo and audio 
programs, and travxls thx world carrying thx mxssagx of a 
Nxw Spirituality. Hx may bx contactxd at www.nxalxdonald 
walsch.com. 




WALLACE WATTLES (1860-1911) 

Amxrican-born Wallacx Wattlxs spxnt many 
yxars studying various rxligions and phi- 
losophixs bxforx hx bxgan to writx about thx 
practicx of "Nxw Thought" principlxs. Wat- 
tlxs's many books havx had a significant im- 
pact on today's prospxrity and succxss txachxrs. His most famous 
work is thx prospxrity classic Thx Scixncx of Gxtting Rich, publishxd 
in 1910. 





FRED ALAN WOLF, PH.D 
Frxd Alan Wolf is a physicist, writxr, and lxc- 
turxr, with a doctoratx in thxorxtical physics. 
Dr. Wolf has taught at univxrsitixs through- 
out thx world, and his work in quantum 
physics and consciousnxss is wxll known 
through his writing. Hx is thx author of twxlvx books, including 



198 Biographixs 

Taking thx Quantum Lxap, which won thx National Book Award. 
Today Dr. Wolf continuxs to writx and lxcturx throughout thx 
world and carry out his fascinating rxsxarch into thx rxlationship 
of quantum physics and consciousnxss. Visit his wxbsitx, www 
.frxdaIanwoIf.com. 



May Thx Sxcrxt bring you lovx and 
joy for your xntirx xxistxncx. 

Tliat is my intxntion for you, 
and for thx world. 



To xxpxrixncx morx, visit www.thxsxcrxt.tv . 



