     Knowledge for Change Program
     Guidelines for Reviewers1

     TTL: Paulo Bastos and Bob Rijkers

     Proposal Title: Automation, Trade, and Labor Markets


     The Knowledge for Change Program’s Internal Management Committee (IMC) seeks expert review
     of all proposals. The contributions of expert reviewers are essential to foster high quality research,
     and careful reviews of research proposals carry great weight in IMC’s funding decisions.

     We would like to draw your attention to the attached KCP III activities document which outlines the
     priority research questions under each theme. Please take it into account in your review. Please
     provide detailed comments, as appropriate.

     Reviewers are requested to respond to the following:

1.       Objectives. Are the goals or objectives of the proposed study well defined? Are the issues
             important for policy in developing (or transition) countries?

            Comments:

            The overall objectives of the project are very clearly stated. It proposes to assess the
            (potential) implications of automation on North-South trade and on developing country
            labour markets.

            Understanding the (potential) impact of automation is highly relevant to (trade) policy
            making in/for developing countries. The repercussions of automation on trade patterns
            and the resulting distributional impacts may require not only smart trade policies, but
            also policy responses in social protection, labour market and education policies.




     1
       Confidentiality of the Review and Reviewer: All reasonable care is taken to maintain reviewer confidentiality.
     The applicant will have the opportunity to read the (anonymous) reviews. Reviewers are asked to omit any obvious
     references to their own work, if any.
     Guidelines for Reviewers
2.     Analytic Design and Data.: Are the analytical approach adequate and methodology rigorous
           to deal with the research questions? Is data attainable or do statistical techniques
           adequately compensate for data limitation?



          Comments:

          The project proposes three analytical approaches: A cross-country analysis of the effects of
          automation in developed countries on imports sourced from developing countries, a case
          study on the labor market effects of US and domestic automation in Mexico and a simulation
          exercise that combines insights of the two previous approaches.

          First, the project thus intends to econometrically analyze the impacts of automation on trade
          using cross-country sector-level data on trade flows and the use of robots. In principle, the
          proposed empirical strategy is adequate and the authors also propose some possible (IV)
          strategies to deal with issues of reverse causality and omitted variable bias. As identification
          is not a side issue in the proposed exercise it would have been instructive to be more explicit
          about the IV strategy and potential omitted variables (I am thinking in particular about
          imports from China). The trade data are a standard (and attainable) source and there are
          methods available to deal with the involved challenges (e.g. zero inflation) the authors are
          certainly aware of. The second (but key) data come from the International Federation of
          Robotics (not “Robots”, as in the proposal, … not yet). It would have been very useful if
          some more detail and shortcomings of these data (coverage, time dimension, sectoral
          disaggregation, representativeness) relevant to the proposed exercise had been presented.
          Further, the authors want to use a EU-wide dataset on industrial production (EU-KLEMS)
          for the factoring-in input-output linkages. Here, it remains somewhat unclear whether this
          implies that this type of analysis (but also the use of some of the proposed IV-strategies that
          rely on employment by tasks) would remain restricted to EU-South trade or whether similar
          data can be obtained for other advanced economies/regions. In general, not enough detail
          is provided on how the authors want to integrate input-output linkages in their analysis.

          Second, the case of Mexico will be subject to an empirical analysis of the local labor market
          impacts of domestic and US automation. The authors propose an approach “in the spirit”
          of Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) to quantify the effect of the exposure of automation on
          local exports, employmemt and wages. The analysis will be conducted using municipal-level
          trade data and information from economic and population census data (plus, of course,
          information on the use of robots). Although not well described in the proposal the variation
          for identifying the effect of automation on local labour markets (I think) comes from national
          and international data on the use of robots that can be used to compute an “exposure to
          automation” measure based on said employment statistics. Some estimation equation would
          have helped the reader to better understand this. Further, some detail on the data on use of
          robots in Mexico (incidence, sectoral disaggregation and some trends) would have been
          very useful to judge the feasibility of the proposed study. In my view, the authors should have
          addressed some points why the Acemoglu and Restrepo approach may not be very easily
          replicated in the Mexican context. To mention one major challenge: Acemoglu and Restrepo
          (2017) use commuting zones in their analysis, which may be different from the administrative
          zones mentioned in the proposal. I am pretty certain that this will be an issue that the authors
          will have to deal with.
                                                            2
   Guidelines for Reviewers

        In a third step, the insights of the former two approaches ought to be combined in a
        “simulation exercise” of different automation and policy scenarios. I am sympathetic to the
        idea of using the obtained results for some indicative scenario analysis. At this stage, this
        section is rather vague albeit some reflections on possible “automation and policy
        scenarios” might have instructive. Further, I would have liked to see, however, some
        mentioning of a (planned) systematic reflection on the external validity of the findings (of
        both studies). This will be required to put the proposed simulation exercises (and, in fact,
        the proposed studies) into context: (1) The studies will only look at the effects of robots in
        industrial activities. While interesting and instructive, in particular for manufacturing
        exporters from the Global South, automation in service sectors will probably have very
        different effects on trade and labour markets. (2) The Mexican case may be peculiar because
        of the (partly) high integration of the firm into US-based value chains. It will be a worthwhile
        exercise to identify places for which the Mexican lessons are particularly worthwhile
        studying.



3. Literature. Does the proposal reflect the current knowledge and literature? Does the proposal
   provide convincing rationale for the selection of issues within an overarching topic ? – through an
   overview of the existing body of literature on the subject, identification of priorities for deeper
   understanding, and discussion of analytical problems constraining operations and policy.


        Comments:

        The proposal (mainly in its literature review section) makes references to the relevant
        related strands of literature and, in this sense, it reflects the current knowledge. It does,
        however, a mixed job in explicitly formulating the key research/policy questions, providing
        a corresponding summary of current knowledge and identifying gaps/issues that the
        proposal can (and cannot) address. This is less the case for the literature on the labour
        market impacts of automation (at the beginning of the literature review, section 3). Here,
        the main findings of key studies and the gaps (with regard to developing countries) are well
        described albeit analytical challenges could have received some more attention. The
        references to the two other literature strands on the impacts of automation on trade patterns
        and structural change are fairly superficial. The paragraph on trade pattern is confusing
        and quickly moves to distributional effects (on skill premia). Here, one would have expected
        to see the contribution of the first study being highlighted. In general, the second part of the
        literature review fails to provide key results from the many cited studies and is not able to
        show knowledge gaps. While the proposal could clearly have done a better job in connecting
        the different strands of literature, the overall rationale for the chosen topic is still convincing
        enough.

        PS: Neither the proposal nor the concept note provide a reference list. This is clearly not
        ideal.




                                                          3
   Guidelines for Reviewers
4. Program Implementation. Is the implementation arrangement appropriate to the demands of
   the work? Is the team sufficiently experienced and skilled to undertake the project?

        Comments:

        The implementation plan corresponds to the project’s requirements. This holds for both the
        envisaged schedule and the project team. The team is composed of a number of experienced
        researchers with relevant publication records (Artuc, Bastos). The tasks of the STC should
        have been described in the implementation plan.




5. Will the proposed study have potential policy impact? Please rate the potential policy impact in
   developing (or transition) countries or in the World Bank, assuming the study is undertaken as
   planned.

         Your rating____4_____(on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being no policy impact and 5 being
         the greatest potential to influence policy)


         Comments:

         The potential policy impact is high since the produced evidence will be in high demand.
         The “future of work”, including in developing countries, is one of the key themes of the
         current economic policy (and development policy) discourses. The authors should be able
         to maximize their impact if their dissemination strategy is not too “paper-based. The
         planned policy-oriented briefs should, in particular, dedicate effort to contextualize their
         findings (see, for example, my remarks above on external validity).




                                                        4
     Guidelines for Reviewers



6.     Local Capacity Building. Does the project incorporate developing country/local research
       capacity building? Please rate the capacity building potential of the project.

              Your rating____1_____(on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being no local capacity building
              and 5 being with significant local capacity building)


              Comments:

              The project does not have a local capacity building component – except that the team
              plans to hire a STC/RA from a developing country, which hardly qualifies as capacity
              building.



7.     Operational Linkage. Is the consultation with related research and operations (client facing
           lending, advisory services) units as documented in the proposal adequate? Will the study
           promote collaboration between research and operations? Please rate the operational linkage
           of the project.


      Your rating:___3____ (on a scale of 1-5, with 1 being no linkage, and 5 being the
      strongest potential to promote collaboration between research and operations)

      Comments:

      The proposal is described as a joint product of the trade group in DEC and the “Jobs
      group” (GP) representing two key units that deal with the issues addressed by the
      proposal . I am surprised that no contact seems to have been established with LAC, but
      only with MENA and EAP, given the prominence of the Mexican case. There is no link to
      operations, albeit there might be some potential to link with units dealing with issues of
      social protection. Further, the links to job diagnostics reports could go beyond the
      eclectic list of Bangladesh, Macedonia and Mexico (with the last of course an obvious
      case).




8.     Budget. Is the budget appropriate? Is the cost commensurate with the possible value of the
           findings? If not, what is your suggested budget for this project if it’s worth funding.


          Comments:

          The proposal is budgeting a STC, some travel costs, and the costs for the
          conference/workshop. This is adequate.

                                                        5
      Guidelines for Reviewers




9.      Assess if the project is a impact evaluation project or a research project that will genearate new
             knowledge on impact evaluation.


               N/A




10.     Suggestions. Where you identify shortcomings, please suggest alternatives to alleviate those
            problems. This might include reference to literature using more appropriate methods,
            reduced scope, a revised team, phased funding or re-sequenced activities. Where possible,
            please give rough estimates of financial and schedule implications.

            Comments:

            I did not identify major shortcomings in the project set-up. As I have explained above
            (policy impact) and below, my main suggestion to the authors is to dedicate some
            intellectual effort to thinking beyond the specific academic insights of the planned papers
            (and also the simulation exercises).




                                                           6
      Guidelines for Reviewers
11.    Overall comments and rating.
       Your overall rating of the proposal_____4______ (on a scale of 1-5, with 1 being the
       worst, and 5 being the best)

       Comments:

       Overall, I clearly recommend this proposal for funding. First, it addresses a highly
       relevant topic and can add sound empirical evidence to a policy discussion that – to a
       large extent and in particular with reference to developing countries – relies on
       assumptions. By examining the impacts of automation in a developing country context
       it fills an important gap in an emerging literature. Second, the project is based on a
       sound analytical framework using attainable data and has a clear and feasible
       workplan that will be implemented by an experienced team. Third, the proposed budget
       is plausible and reasonable.

       The project neatly links KCP’s central “Shared Prosperity” theme with the topical
       focus on “International Cooperation and Global Public Goods”.

       I have outlined above some weaknesses of the proposal. The analytical part could have
       been more clearly written. This holds in particular for the section on the Mexican case
       study. Then, the data on the usage of robots come with challenges that are not easibly
       addressed. Unfortunately, the proposal does not provide sufficient detail on these data
       and solutions to potential empirical challenges in the specific context of the proposed
       work. I am, however, confident that the team will be able to address the challenges
       when they advance in their project. The literature review fails to synthesize the
       different strands of the literature that are relevant to the project, but the authors are
       able to demonstrate their knowledge of the state of the art.

       I raise above some concerns regarding the potential policy impact of the project
       despite the fact that the kind of evidence produced will be in high demand. Currently,
       the proposal is fairly focused on generating new academic insights albeit it plans to
       feature them in country strategies, blogs and a conference (with participation of
       “policy-makers”). This is a welcome approach, but the findings may require a better
       link to specific policies and (as stressed above lerady) may need to be put into
       perspective to become policy-relevant.

       So first, I would like to see some more explicit engagement with possible policy
       responses (conditional on country characteristics and initial conditions). Too often,
       broad policy recommendations in this realm boil down to “identifying and
       compensating losers” and some supply-side labour market measures to help workers
       adjust (“life-long learning” etc.). Here, a more systematic approach that looks into
       policy responses in developing countries, for example to industry reallocations, would
       be useful. Further, some fresh, and maybe unconventional, thinking may be required …
       Can the “new” social protection systems (Mexico a case in point) be used to mitigate
       potential adverse (imported) effects of automation? Are there other policies to deal
       with adjustment and is there a role for trade policy.



                                                          7
Guidelines for Reviewers


      Second, let me elaborate a bit more on how the findings need to put into perspective by
      examining a bit more closely a statement made in the proposal, namely that automation
      could “prematurely close the door for labor intensive, export-led growth as a
      development model for inclusive growth”. For interpreting the results of their papers
      with reference to this very important development policy question will require the
      authors to go quite some way, which I wan to illustrate with two important aspects of
      the effects of automation (and there are more). First, there have been – and probably
      will be – very different varities of the “labor intensive, export-led” development model.
      Leaving aside China as a very special case, there are countries that have developed (or
      currently do) an export base in labour-intensive low-tech industries, typically in
      textiles and apparels (Bangaldesh, Vietnam, Cambodia, Mauritius, etc.) that have
      upgraded (or may in the future) to industries with higher valued added and deeper
      integration into global value chains. Then, there are the cases of Mexico and Eastern
      Europe (and some cases in the South-East Asia) where integration started when the
      concerned countries were already at higher income levels, with an important role for
      higher value added industries, often the automotive industry, in a number of cases.
      Probably, automation will have very different implications at the different stages of
      export-led development. Second, this, in turn, has important implications for the
      distributional impacts of automation that is likely to differ between the different
      varieties (or stages) of integration. For example, it is well known that the distributional
      impacts of Mexico’s integration into global value chains were much less favorable than
      anticipated by many.




                                                      8
