My name is Edward Joseph Snowden. I used to work for the government, but
I work for the public. It took me nearly three decades to recognize that there *
was a distinction, and when I did, it got me into a bit of trouble at the office. As
a result, I now spend my time trying to protect the public from the person I used
to be-a spy for the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and National Security
Agency (NSA), just another young technologist out to build what I was sure
would be a better world.

My career in the American Intelligence Community (IC) only lasted a short
seven years, which I'm surprised to realize is just one year longer than the time
I've spent since in exile in a country that wasn't my choice. During that seven-
year stint, however, I participated in the most significant change in the history of
American espionage-the change from the targeted surveillance of individuals to
the mass surveillance of entire populations. I helped make it technologically
feasible for a single government to collect all the world's digital
communications, store them for ages, and search through them at will.

After 9/11, the IC was racked with guilt for failing to protect America, for
letting the most devastating* and destructive attack on the country since Pearl
Harbor occur on its watch. In response, its leaders sought to build a system that
would prevent them from being caught off guard ever again.
On its foundation, technology, a foreign thing to their army of political science *majors
and masters of business administration. The doors to the most secreti-
ve *intelligence agencies were flung wide open to young technologists like myself.
And so the geek inherited the earth.

If I knew anything back then, I knew computers, so I rose quickly. At twenty-
two, I got my first top secret clearance from the NSA, for a position at the very
bottom of the org chart. Less than a year later, I was at the CIA, as a systems
engineer with sprawling access to some of the most sensitive networks *on the
planet. The only adult supervision was a guy who spent his shifts reading





paperbacks by Robert Ludlum* and Tom Clancy. The agencies were breaking all
of their own rules in their quest to hire technical talent. They'd normally never
hire anybody without a bachelor's degree, or later at least an associate's, neither
of which I had.
Yes, by all rights, I should never have even been let into the building. *

From 2007 to 2009, I was stationed at the US Embassy in Geneva as one of
the rare technologists deployed under diplomatic cover, tasked with bringing the
CIA into the future by bringing its European stations online, digitizing and
automating the network by which the US government spied. My generation did
more than reengineer the work of intelligence; we entirely redefined what
intelligence was. For us, it was not about clandestine meetings or dead drops, but
about data.

By age twenty-six, I was a nominal employee of Dell, but once again
working for the NS A. Contracting had become my cover, as it was for nearly all
the *tech-inclined spies of my cohort. I was sent to Japan, where I helped to
design what amounted to the agency's global backup-a massive covert network
that ensured that even if the NSA's headquarters was reduced to ash in a nuclear
blast, no data would ever be lost. At the time, I didn't realize that engineering a
system that would keep a permanent record of everyone's life was a tragic
mistake.

I came back to the States at age twenty-eight, and received a stratospheric
promotion to the technical liaison team handling Dell's relationship with the
CIA. My job was to sit down with the heads of the technical divisions of the CIA
in order to design and sell the solution to any problem that they could imagine. My team
helped the agency build a new *type of computing architecture-a
"cloud," the first technology that enabled every agent, no matter where they
were physically located, to access and search any data they needed, no matter the
distance.

In sum, a job managing and connecting the flow of intelligence gave way to a
job figuring out how to store it forever, which in turn gave way to a job making
sure it was universally available and searchable. These projects came into focus
for me in Hawaii, where I moved to take a new contract with the NS A at the age
of twenty-nine. *Up until then, I'd been laboring under the doctrine of Need to
Know, unable to understand the cumulative purpose behind my specialized,
compartmentalized tasks. It was only in paradise that I was fi-
nally in a position to see how all my work fit together, meshing like the gears *of a giant machine
to form a system of global mass surveillance.
